UCLA
UCLA Previously Published Works

Title
Hypercities Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3mh5t455

ISBN
9780674725348

Authors
Presner, Todd
Shepard, David
Kawano, Yoh

Publication Date
2014-07-07

Copyright Information
This work is made available under the terms of a Creative Commons
Attribution License, availalbe at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

Peer reviewed




 eScholarship.org             Powered by the California Digital Library
                                              University of California
                                  metaLABprojects

   The metaLABprojects series provides a platform for emerging currents of experimental
scholarship, documenting key moments in the history of networked culture, and promoting
     critical thinking about the future of institutions of learning. The volumes’ eclectic,
    improvisatory, idea-driven style advances the proposition that design is not merely
  ornamental, but a means of inquiry in its own right. Accessibly priced and provocatively
 designed, the series invites readers to take part in reimagining print-based scholarship for
                          the digital age. www.metalab.harvard.edu




                                        Series Editor
                                     Jeffrey T. Schnapp

                                      Advisory Board
                                Ian Bogost (Georgia Tech)
                              Giuliana Bruno (Harvard VES)
                                     Jo Guldi (Brown)
                              Michael Hayes (Harvard GSD)
                             Bruno Latour (Sciences Po, Paris)
                             Bethany Noviskie (U of Virginia)
                                  Andrew Piper (McGill)
                                Mark C. Taylor (Columbia)

                                     Art Direction
                                     Daniele Ledda
                               metaLAB and xycomm (Milan)
Messenger bag Intelligentsia meh pork belly,
Austin bespoke biodiesel Schlitz shabby chic fap Neutra.

Proverbs




                 Todd Presner
                David Shepard
                 Yoh Kawano
                  HyperCities
                Thick Mapping
                 in the Digital
                  Humanities




                      ––––––––––––
                       metaLABprojects
Table of Contents

  6   Preface
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
  12  Lexicon
      		 HyperCities
      		 Thick Mapping
      		 Digital Humanities

   22      The Humanities in the Digital Humanities
           		 HyperCities: A Very Brief History
           		 Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities

   66      Windows
             Los Angeles Ghost Maps
             PDub Productions: Mapping HiFi

   84      The View from Above / Below
           		 Toward a Media Archaeology of Google Earth
           		 Counter-Mapping
           		 Georeferencing: "It is turtles all the way down"


   128     Windows
             Rome: Jumping Over the Line
             Mapping the 2009 Election Protests in Tehran

   140     Mapping Events / Mapping Social Media
           		 Participatory Digital Humanities
           		 On the Event: HyperCities Now (Egypt, Libya, Japan)

   184Gallery: A Journey through Tohoku, Japan
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
   204     Endnotes
   211     Acknowledgments
   212     Credits
Preface
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––


–––     HYPER– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
–––     HyperCities – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
–––––––         Hypermedia – – – – – – – – – –

        		Hypertext – – – – – – – –
–––––––––––



    The prefix “hyper” refers to multiplicity, abundance, and
( TP)

heterogeneity. A hypertext is more than a written text; hyper-
media is more than a single medium; and HyperCities are
more than the physical spaces of cities. “Hyper” adds to, ex-
tends, and proliferates: many texts and media, many exten-
sions to and contestations of the historical record, and an
infinitely open field of possibilities for participation. A Hy-
perCity is a real city overlaid with thick information net-
works that not only catalyze the present but also go back in
time to document the past and go forward to project future
possibilities. HyperCities are always under construction.




6
      This is a book about humanities explorations of digital
mapping. That’s strange, you say. What do the humanities
have to do with map-making? And why write a book about
something digital? To address the first question: the book
brings together the methods, content, and values of the hu-
manities to create and re-create representations of places,
what we are calling “thick mapping.” The methods are de-
sign-centered, critical interrogations and interpretations of
the multiplicity, heterogeneity, and ambiguity of the cultural
record of places. It is not a book about “maps” per se but
about exploring, participating, and listening, something that
transforms our conception of mapping into a practice of eth-
ics. At the core of this book is an idea about the possibility of
expanding participation and of the value of knowledge in the
service of the public good.
      But why write a book? A book allows for the choreogra-
phy of an argument. While you can certainly start at any point
in the book or skip around at will, if you read the pages se-
quentially, you will be brought through the argument as a
choreographed experience, much like watching a dance en-
semble perform a piece from start to finish. The authors imag-
ine the book as a stage upon which a performance takes place,
one in which many voices and movements come together in
time. In this sense, the book is not a simple linear narrative;
rather, it is a staging of various kinds of narratives and media
in a spatial arrangement that is cumulative and recursive. In
other words, the book represents a practice of mapping, an
emplotment of many narratives and voices at once.
      It starts with a series of essayistic pieces that define the
key terms (HyperCities, thick mapping, digital humanities)
before turning to a conceptual and technological genealogy
of the HyperCities project. In places throughout the book,
the narratives run parallel to a series of critical code studies.




7
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



We examine modules of code in order to expose the under-
girding assumptions and structuring principles built into the
HyperCities project at the level of the code itself. From there,
the first project windows open up. These windows are written
in the voices of the authors, designers, and cartographers
themselves. After that, the book presents a media archaeolo-
gy of Google Earth and turns to several cultural-historical
investigations of map projections and the political epistemol-
ogies of mapping. This chapter tarries with the profound con-
tradictions and fraught dialectic at the heart of the HyperCit-
ies project and digital cultural mapping more generally. The
final chapter focuses on two world-historical events—the
2011 “Arab Spring” in Egypt and Libya, and the Japanese
earthquake and tsunami that same year—through the lens of
social media mapping. The investigation moves from aggrega-
tions of data and high-altitude visualizations to the singulari-
ty of the human voice that personalizes and punctures any
abstracted totality. The narrative changes from theoretical and
conceptual explorations of “events” to first-person accounts,
photographic documents, and fragmentary, 140-character
long Twitter streams. The geolocated tweets of a single eyewit-
ness, Tranquil Dragon, are mapped onto the space of the page
and can be “played” like a miniature flip-book.
       Throughout the book, we can also make use of certain
rhetorical devices, tropes, and figures such as synecdoche,
ekphrasis, and aphorism. We consciously move between ver-
bal and visual modes, while writing in several different regis-
ters, sometimes even on the same page, in order to denatural-
ize expectations of a single, objective voice. At the same time,
the authors assume multiple relationships to and perspec-
tives on the material, the events, and the objects of study. We
take up these positions from within the act of writing and
composing, as a kind of middle voice, in which neither active




8
PREFACE



nor passive speech predominates. This is also driven by an
awareness of our (sometimes) precarious ethical stance and
embodied relationship vis-à-vis the material under consider-
ation. Sometimes the view is “zoomed out” from a perspec-
tive of abstracted data, and sometimes the view is profoundly
“zoomed in,” such as Kawano’s experience of going inside the
radiation zone around the Fukushima nuclear power plant.
This is a view that is no longer that of a safe spectator but of
a body-at-risk.
       More pointedly, the book is an experiment in remedia-
tion, in which certain expectations of genre and narrative are
consciously flouted. “Scholarly” writing exists side-by-side
with code, which exists side-by-side with community gener-
ated content and voices from the public-at-large through so-
cial media feeds. As the book progresses, the long-form nar-
ratives break down into smaller and smaller pieces such as
data streams, tweets, and images to reveal different perspec-
tives—distant and close—on the mapping of events. The last
chapter literalizes Walter Benjamin’s famous injunction that
“history breaks down into images, not into histories [or sto-
ries, or narratives].”1 Benjamin was playing with the German
term for history (Geschichte), which can mean an event (in
the sense of das Geschehen, something that happened) as well
as “history” or “story” in the sense of a narrative account of
events and occurrences. For Benjamin, there is no homology
between that which happened and the narrative means to
present the past; instead, there are only transitory, fragile, and
dialectical images, which form montages of interplay and
constellations of tension between that which was and the
now-time of a given present.
       Altogether, you are looking at a book that was collabo-
ratively conceived, authored, and choreographed at every
stage of its development and design. The primary authors




9
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



were Todd Presner (Minion Pro), David Shepard (OCRB),
and Yoh Kawano (Neuzeit S). Not unlike Mark Z. Danielews-
ki’s experimental novel House of Leaves, the different fonts
within the book indicate changes in narrative voices. The
book also features contributions written and designed by
project leaders that open up as “windows” onto the Hyper-
Cities idea and digital cultural mapping more generally.
There are four such windows in the book: a thickly layered
“ghost map” of downtown Los Angeles by Philip Ethington; a
cultural history of Historic Filipinotown (HiFi) in Los Ange-
les by Mike Blockstein and Reanne Estrada, told through
multiple mappings of this neighborhood using personal sto-
ries, art installations, and video testimonies; a four-dimen-
sional geotemporal argument and virtual worlds exploration
of the Roman Forum in the ancient world by Diane Favro
and Chris Johanson; and, finally, a day-by-day and hour-by-
hour mapping of the Tehran election protests of 2009 by
Xárene Eskandar using social media.
       In selecting these four windows, we wanted to showcase
some of the variety and texture of mapping projects in the
digital humanities. They are each told through the voices of
the primary project cartographers and exemplify innovative
approaches to creating and deepening public knowledge. In
the case of the HiFi project, for example, many of the voices
are those of immigrant youth living in Historic Filipinotown,
collaborating with a class at UCLA, the Pilipino Workers
Center of Southern California, and a social enterprise called
Public Matters to create a cultural record and to preserve
community memories of this neighborhood. In the case of
Tehran, the maps are attempts to curate the voices and imag-
es of protest in the face of powers determined to suppress
and erase them.
       All these voices and maps come together not in a hy-




10
PREFACE



pertext (which continuously changes) but a hyperbook about
HyperCities, a “build” of a digital platform in the form of a
book. It is a polyvocal, multilevel form inspired by and con-
structed with digital technology, manifested in print because
a printed book can assemble these multitudes into a snapshot
before they separate again. Or not a snapshot, perhaps, but a
timed exposure: many of these projects and ideas took years
to assemble, and we hope they will persist. This record marks
them as enduring but acknowledges they may change or dis-
appear. It is an act of remediation and transmission, as much
as an act of preservation, of the ephemerality of the digital.




11
Lexicon

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––


HyperCities

   Imagine a digital narrative crisscross-
(TP)



ing place and time, starting with the
date and location of your birth. The nar-
rative grows, fragments, and connects
many places and times together, as your
life unfolds and as you tell your story.
Any event in your life can be geo- and
time-located, and each event connects
with innumerable other events in your
life and the lives of others. Everyone’s
life story intersects with countless others
at every moment, creating ever denser
webs that document the complexity of
the human experience. Every story matters, every voice can
be heard, every event—no matter how big or how small —
can be captured.
      What if the World Wide Web was composed of lives, not
pages? Imagine a search and discovery tool for this web in
which you traveled through time and space, rather than in-
putting keywords in an empty white box. Imagine browsing
this web by deciding where and when you wanted to go rath-
er than what you needed to find. What if you could “drill
down” at a given place over the last ten seconds, the last ten
minutes, the last ten months, the last ten years, or the last ten
centuries? Among other things you might find historical
maps, architectural reconstructions, personal stories, pictures,
documents, and other sources that bring alive the texture and
vibrancy of past places. What if you could search any place in
the world on a single day, and what if these ever-expanding,
ever-thicker webs of events, documents, and lives were keyed
to physical locations in built spaces? What if there was a way
to let the ghosts return, the memories come to life, and the
silenced voices be heard? Would it be a vision of digital de-
mocracy or a dystopia of total knowledge and control?
      Alas, HyperCities doesn’t exist. It’s an idea, largely unre-
alized, perhaps impossible. This book is an exploration of
attempts to imagine, build, and tarry with something called
HyperCities. It documents a series of “laboratory” projects
inspired by this idea. If you are looking for a finished soft-
ware platform called HyperCities, let us be clear: it doesn’t
exist. There is no fully functional, released piece of software,
only a series of prototypes, experiments, code modules, and
projects that more or less work. This book is a synthesis of the
HyperCities idea, composed in historical, conceptual, and
speculative modes. It tells the dialectical story of an idea—
through many voices and with many authors—in the bur-




13
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



geoning field called “thick mapping in the digital humanities.”
      Semantically, the term “HyperCities” accords with “hy-
pertext” and “hypermedia,” coinages by the visionary media
theorist Theodor Nelson.2 In a seminal essay of 1965, “A File
Structure for the Complex, the Changing, and the Indetermi-
nate,” Nelson sketched out an open-ended, non-linear system
for organizing, interlinking, and accessing information. A
hypertextual structure, in his articulation, cannot be reduced
to a single medium (such as print) and could grow and
change as new information was added to the system. The
term “hypertext” thus refers to “a body of written or pictorial
material interconnected in such a complex way that it could
not conveniently be presented or represented on paper . . .
Such a system could grow indefinitely, gradually including
more and more of the world’s written knowledge” (144). An-
ticipating the World Wide Web by nearly twenty years, Nel-
son called his invention the “Evolutionary List File,” an inter-
connected, interlinked, hypermedia information system that
could grow and proliferate as users added new material. As
an open-ended authoring, curatorial, and annotation envi-
ronment, HyperCities is founded on an analogous logic.
      Within the disciplines of geography and urban plan-
ning, “hypercities” sometimes refer to densely populated cit-
ies with more than twenty million inhabitants, so-called
“megacities.” While this definition is relevant for investigating
urbanism and population dynamics, the HyperCities idea
focuses on the past, present, and future of cities. In this re-
spect, HyperCities are much larger than twenty million in-
habitants, since they might embody the entire (largely erased
or absent) history of a city—potentially every life, every
structure, every street, every voice over time. Of course, it
would be absurd to posit the resuscitation of the dead or pur-
sue a naïve positivism (that the past can be fully recuperated




14
LEXICON



or represented by the employment of technology); instead,
HyperCities is about the possibility of telling stories, of nar-
rating places, and of producing new configurations of knowl-
edge in which every past, present, and future is a place. In
this sense, mapping history is about curating places, conjur-
ing and caring for ghosts.



Thick Mapping

      Mapping is not a one-time thing, and maps are not sta-
ble objects that reference, reflect, or correspond to an exter-
nal reality. Mapping is a verb and bespeaks an on-going pro-
cess of picturing, narrating, symbolizing, contesting, re-pic-
turing, re-narrating, re-symbolizing, erasing, and re-inscrib-
ing a set of relations. On its most fundamental level, a map is
a graphical representation of a set of relations. Maps are visu-
al arguments and stories; they make claims and harbor ideals,
hopes, desires, biases, prejudices, and violences. They are al-
ways relational, in dialogue or in contact with someone or
something. They may or may not attempt to reference, reflect,
or represent an “external reality” (however one defines that),
but they are fundamentally propositions, suffused with
world-views, structuring epistemologies, and ways of seeing.
Maps are representations of a world, which reference other
such representations. When we georeference historical maps,
we are not “correcting” them or making them “accurate”; in-
stead, we are keying one representation to another represen-
tation (not to reality).
      The history of cartography indicates a clear recognition
of the material substance or media of the map. The very
terms “map“ and “chart“ derive from their materiality: the
Latin word carta denotes a formal document on paper or




15
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



parchment, while the term mappa indicates cloth.3 Prior to
the printing of maps in the late fifteenth century, maps were
often drawn on parchment or cloth or etched in wood, metal,
or stone. In Renaissance Europe, the circumnavigation of the
world and the production of accurate projections for empiri-
cal exploration went hand-in-hand with the engraving of
world maps and the production of celestial and terrestrial
globes. With the development of the printing press and the
scientific revolution in the Age of the Enlightenment, map-
ping began to assume a central role in developing accurate
statistical methods (such as the census) and the proliferation
of mappable data, both of which played a critical role in the
expansion of the European nation-state and the colonial con-
quest of the “unknown” world. Not until the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries did non-print technologies
(particularly, aerial photography and film) play a role in pro-
ducing maps of the world. This would be taken to a new level
with the deployment of remote sensing Global Positioning
Satellites (GPS), allowing accurate determinations and tar-
geting of any point on earth according to latitude, longitude,
altitude, and time. With the development of the first compu-
tational tools for producing digital maps and analyzing
troves of geo-data in the 1970s, the material history of map-
ping entered a new chapter: mapping was transmogrified
into computational processes and Geographic Information
Systems (GIS). Today, web-based mapping applications such
as Google Earth, OpenStreetMap, and WorldMap have
brought the analytic tools of GIS to the general public and
are changing the way people create, visualize, interpret, and
access geographic information.
      Digital mapping offers a significant break in the history
of cartography precisely because it fundamentally changes
the materiality and media of mapping. Unlike artifactual




16
LEXICON



maps on paper, cloth, or parchment, digital maps are extensi-
ble, mobile, and networked. As such, new data about location
(ranging from traffic reports, crime statistics, voting patterns,
and housing prices to user-generated routes, historical pho-
tographs, and personal stories) can be instantly added from a
range of web-enabled devices. But until recently, these tools
have primarily served utilitarian purposes (like driving di-
rections), as well as, more ominously, micro-level surveil-
lance and population monitoring. Following the 2012 presi-
dential race, massive amounts of GIS data, strategically keyed
to and targeted at the granularity of a given household, were
touted as critical determinants for Obama’s reelection. And
following the revelations of the scope of the NSA’s dataveil-
lance programs, we now know that we live in a world in
which everything and everyone can be watched, monitored,
tracked, and mapped. “Thick mapping” has an underbelly of
unmitigated paranoia and unchecked control.
      On its most basic level, “thick mapping” refers to the
processes of collecting, aggregating, and visualizing ever
more layers of geographic or place-specific data. Thick maps
are sometimes called “deep maps” because they embody tem-
poral and historical dynamics through a multiplicity of lay-
ered narratives, sources, and even representational practices.4
But “thickness,” as we are using the term here, is not quite
tantamount to “depth.” Depth models, of course, abound in
the history of modernism: Freud imagines psychoanalysis as
an archaeological enterprise, likened to unearthing ancient
Rome, in which the latent desires of the subject can be
probed ever more deeply; hermeneutical models in the sci-
ences and certain historical disciplines imagine their meth-
ods as excavations of hidden processes and meanings; the
aesthetic forms of modernism—the black square on a black
canvas, the glass box, but also the montage form—stemmed




17
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



from a world in which deep, total, and utopian “solutions”
were still imaginable and possible. Postmodernism, on the
other hand, is supposedly all about surface, the infinite play
of signifiers, the total loss of historicity, and the schizophren-
ic subject called to cognitively map the world in order to
somehow brook resistance to the leveling effects of capital-
ism. It privileges categories of spatiality precisely because the
mutation in the global spaces of multinational capital re-
quires the development of new perceptual habits to find ori-
entation, develop agency, and map this space.5
      HyperCities draws from both modernism and post-
modernism: it is inspired by a depth model rooted in the idea
of archaeological coring and can be seen as a response to the
crisis of historicity. And yet it is infinitely extensible and rhi-
zomatic in practice, simultaneously moving vertically and
horizontally, down and across. Intertextual play exists side-
by-side with historical layers of meaning-making; practices
of cognitive mapping are both global and local but never
simply mimetic, as if a stable external reality can be reliably
and definitively mapped.
      Instead of positing another depth model or yet another
celebration of postmodern hyperspace, the HyperCities proj-
ect strives for “thickness.” Thickness means extensibility and
polyvocality: diachronic and synchronic, temporally layered,
and polyvalent ways of authoring, knowing, and making
meaning. Not unlike the notion of “thick description” made
famous by anthropologist Clifford Geertz, thickness connotes
a kind of cultural analysis trained on the political, economic,
linguistic, social, and other stratificatory and contextual reali-
ties in which human beings act and create.6 By eschewing any
kind of universalism, it is a kind of analysis that is intrinsi-
cally incomplete, always under contestation, and never reach-
ing any kind of final, underlying truth. Thick mappings, like




18
LEXICON



thick descriptions, emphasize context and meaning-making
through a combination of micro and macro analyses that
foster a multiplicity of interpretations rather than simply re-
porting facts or considering maps as somehow given, objec-
tive, or complete.
       Thick maps are conjoined with stories, and stories are
conjoined with maps, such that ever more complex contexts
for meaning are created. As such, thick maps are never fin-
ished and meanings are never definitive. They are infinitely
extensible and participatory, open to the unknown and to
futures that have not yet come. And perhaps most important-
ly, thick maps betray their conditions of possibility, their au-
thorship and contingency, without naturalizing or imposing
a singular world-view. In essence, thick maps give rise to
forms of counter-mapping, alternative maps, multiple voices,
and on-going contestations. Thick maps are not simply “more
data” on maps, but interrogations of the very possibility of
data, mapping, and cartographic representational practices.
In this sense, “thickness” arises from the never-ending fric-
tion between maps and counter-maps, constructions and de-
constructions, mappings and counter-mappings.



Digital Humanities

      The conjunction of “digital” and “humanities” raises
fundamental questions for documenting and analyzing the
cultural record of humankind. “Digital” is a shorthand term
that connotes the domain of the computational governed by
binary numeric form and the electronic technologies that
operate according to this logic. The Internet and the World
Wide Web are, of course, digital technologies but the digital
refers, more broadly, to any computational or algorithmic




19
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



procedure to encode, present, distribute, and analyze data.
This logic is, ostensibly, antithetical to the “humanities” which
are, at least traditionally, the domain of the arts, philosophy,
literature, and culture more generally. The humanities are
characterized by creative energies and critical practices that
relish ambiguity, subjectivity, and interpretation. They cannot
be reduced to ones and zeros.
       But over the past decade, the methods, media, and ma-
teriality of humanities research have undergone dramatic
change, with massive new possibilities emerging for author-
ship, creative design, meaning-making, data curation, inter-
action, and dissemination of scholarship. The world of print
culture has not vanished, but it has become transformed in
fundamental ways and supplemented by new technologies
that allow researchers to ask entirely new questions about the
cultural record, at a scale that requires computation. As such,
the humanities have developed new research methods
through their encounter with the computational sciences, not
only creating large and complex cultural datasets for analysis
but also fostering humanistic approaches to algorithmic
thought, which interrogate the governing assumptions built
into technologies, data, and computational practices them-
selves. “Digital Humanities” is an emerging field that explores
the deeply productive tension and precarious linkage be-
tween computational practices and humanities scholarship.
The HyperCities project is a product of this linkage.
       This is why HyperCities is not primarily a “technologi-
cal” or “computational” problem but foremost a “humanities”
problem, namely one of memory, narrative, archival practic-
es, knowledge design, and, finally, ethics. The Digital Human-
ities for which I am arguing is not simply about computa-
tional processing of data but about the design of something
new, an “insertion”—as Hannah Arendt might say—of a new




20
potentiality, of a future that remains open to possibilities,
even new worlds. We thus begin by inserting ourselves into
the world.
The Humanities
in the Digital
Humanities
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––




                        – Walter Benjamin, The Arcades Project, 1928-40




  The figure of the flâneur—the so-
(TP)



called “man of the crowd”—was made
popular in the mid-nineteenth century
by the likes of Edgar Allan Poe and
Charles Baudelaire in short stories and
poetry that portrayed the modernity of
great cities like London and Paris. The flâneur (almost always
a man of leisure, a dandy) strolled along the bustling streets,
under the gas lamps, observing the metropolis as an urban
spectator and occupying a liminal zone of privilege and
transgression. But for Walter Benjamin, the German-Jewish
cultural critic and philosopher writing his magnum opus,
The Arcades Project, a book on nineteenth century Paris,
the flâneur was not simply someone who walked the streets
of the modern metropolis and disappeared into the swarm
of crowds; rather, it was someone who was a time-traveler.
As the flâneur walked along the streets, he was conducted
downward in time. What a striking idea: that the physical
topography of the street could lead you back to a time that
had vanished, to a time that was not even your own. How
could this be? Is it really the street, or might it be a kind of
sensibility or openness to apprehending, listening to, and,
ultimately, caring about and caring for the past? In other
words, maybe the past is always there—quiet, muted, faded,
hidden—and it is the task of the flâneur to enable it to
speak, to make it come alive and come to light, and, thereby,
resonate with the present. In this sense, the past must be
conjured, awakened, and cared for.



Legibility / Recognizability

         Driving around Los Angeles, I use Google Maps al-
     ( TP)

most every day. The streets are yellow, the buildings are
white, the parks are green, and the waterways are blue. Street
names are written in black Arial font with a white glow. The
maps are clean and move effortlessly with my finger. They
seem infinitely draggable and zoomable. The browser win-
dow on my laptop or phone is hardly a limitation; these maps




23
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



are slippy beyond all enframing. And they grow thicker, as
multiple data layers are toggled on or off: traffic, satellite im-
agery, photos, webcams, and more. I get driving directions
and check for traffic using Google’s real-time data. Don’t take
the 405 at this time of day. Clicking on the little orange per-
son, I am taken out of my world of stereoscopic vision to one
constituted by nine camera eyes and stitched together to
form a panoramic digital bubble that lets me see streets, inte-
riors, and even oceans 360 degrees horizontally and 290 de-
grees vertically. I start to see differently, as if I’m flying above
the world, zooming in and zooming out at will, in a
multi-perspectival digital bubble. What does it mean that this
seamless panning and zooming has become (almost) natu-
ralized, that it has become how I see and experience the
world, or how I want to see and experience my world?
      I turn off Google Maps and start to drive. I wonder:
what would it mean to drive downward, into the buried pasts
that persist somewhere—in the imagination, in the archive,
in the memories of others, in the traces of places long gone
and lost? Who used to live here? What used to be there?
What’s buried under this freeway, under this skyscraper, be-
neath these overpasses? What has vanished imperceptibly
from the surface of the earth? What voices and ghosts haunt,
however imperceptibly, these concrete landscapes? Why do I
care? It’s a past which is, ostensibly, not my own. I don’t rec-
ognize it. It’s not mine. Time is out of joint.
      Berlin, November 1995. Six years earlier, I had watched
the Berlin Wall tumble on an eighteen-inch television screen
mounted above the blackboard on the wall of my high school
history classroom. Now, I was living in Berlin, near Mitte, a
region in the east that had once been the center of Berlin’s
eastern-European Jewish population. The outer walls of build-
ings still had bullet holes from street fighting during the last




24
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



months of the Second World War. Cranes dotted the city sky-
line, and brightly colored pipes, pink and green, ran along and
over almost every street. Water was constantly being pumped
out of the ground. Because the entire city is built on sand, the
water table is only a few meters deep. Friedrich Schinkel,
arguably Berlin’s greatest architect, knew this when he decid-
ed to build the Altes Museum, a monumental Greco-Roman
building, on a massive pile of logs to prevent it from sinking.
Hitler’s architect, Albert Speer, was also aware of the problem
and engineered a massive pylon structure to hold up Hitler’s
Triumphal Arch, intended to mark the new southerly en-
trance into the city and celebrate the thousand-year empire.
The pylon is a solid cement cylinder that measures 14 meters       (1)




25
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



high, 21 meters in diameter, and extends 18 meters under-
ground; it weighs 12,650 tons and exerts a pressure of 72 tons
per square foot. It’s still there today (you can see it in Google
Earth), and it can’t be destroyed because it is too close to resi-
dential apartments. (Fig. 1) And so it remains in a middle-class
neighborhood in southern Berlin, as a strangely protected
monument to a megalomaniacal dream. The triumphal arch,
of course, was never built.
       The Wall divided the city for twenty-eight years, or,
more precisely, encircled West Berlin and turned it into a lit-
tle island in the middle of East Germany. Subway stops locat-
ed in the east turned into “ghost stations,” as underground
trains originating in the west could no longer stop in East
Berlin. Above ground, long-distance railway lines that once
connected Berlin to all of Europe sat idle, cut off by the Wall.
Over decades, trees grew between the railway tracks; stations
languished in ruin, bombed out by the aerial war and left to
the forces of nature as the Cold War raged on. I became ob-
sessed with ruins, perhaps because I wasn’t used to living
among them. For Berliners, they were as unremarkable as
any other feature of the natural or built environment. Berlin
is a very flat city, but there are two mountains in the neigh-
borhood of Friedrichshain, both covered with grass and even
hiking trails. They are man-made mountains of debris, the
remains of two million cubic meters of destroyed buildings
that were firebombed in the last years of the War.
       Other ruins, like those of Berlin’s proudest railway sta-
tion, the Anhalter Bahnhof, and the railway tracks leading
away from it, were simply fenced off, stranded in another time
and left to the future to figure out what to do with them. They
were finally disposed of in 2008, more than half a century af-
ter the last train departed the railway station. Only a small
fragment of the entrance portal to this once-great railway sta-




26
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES




tion remains, sitting idly beside a busy street and soccer park,   (2)
which exists on the empty ground where the station once
stood. (Fig. 2) The past was recognizable, but only just barely.



Time (the simultaneity of the non-simultaneous) /
Space (the contiguity of the non-contiguous)

     ( TP) Great cities like Berlin are almost inconceivably

complex and multilayered. Over its nearly eight centuries,
Berlin emerged from a backwater mercantile town built
on sand to become the capital of a unified Germany
under Bismarck and the site of Hitler’s dream for a world-
dominant Germania. It was devastated by the Thirty Years
War, occupied by Napoleon in 1805, rebuilt numerous
times throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,




27
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities




destroyed by the aerial bombardment campaigns of World
War II, divided by the Berlin Wall for twenty-eight years, and
hastily put back together again in 1990. Poised on the border
between Western and Eastern Europe, this cosmopolitan
city has variously welcomed and persecuted its minorities:
Huguenots, Jews, Poles, Russians, Turks, and others. It
doubled in size in less than a quarter of a century between
1890 and 1925, reaching a size of four million people, and
making it one of the largest cities in the world at the time.
Another quarter of a century later, it lost almost half of its
population and nearly all of its Jewish population in World
War II and the Holocaust. Berlin, like other great cities, is
comprised of densely layered architectural, social, political,
and cultural palimpsests. I began to wonder: how can one
make sense of this complexity, the many pasts, hopes, fears,
and desires built and buried in these urban landscapes? How
could one detect, mark, or hear the voices that had once
traveled in these places, many of which are now just ruins?
What did it mean to walk, as a flâneur, along these streets of
amnesia? I began making mental maps of vanished times.
      In the mid-1990s, I was hardly the only one to engage in
such a critical, cartographic practice of memory and media.
It was at this time that I encountered the Berlin interventions
of the ART+COM group, particularly their multimedia
project “The Invisible Shape of Things Past” (1995–2007).7
This interactive mapping and visualization project, focused
on Berlin’s Leipzigerplatz, placed historic film sequences
as three-dimensional spatial objects on top of time maps.
The result was a series of complex time-space perspectives
and navigational interfaces to probe the layered histories of
Berlin, some of which were still visible but most of which had
slipped into oblivion. Like “The Invisible Shape of Things
Past,” the maps I began to create as a prototype for the




28
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



HyperCities project were strangely dense—like stacks of
images overlaid one on top of the other—that did not quite
line up and offered little in the way of clarity. That’s because
all of these pasts co-exist, in various degrees, depending on
what remains legible and what we care to recognize in the
spaces of the present. A church from the thirteenth century
sits next to an imposing television tower, encircled by the
sedimented remains of the medieval city wall and a moat,
on which a railway line runs and crisscrosses the city that
was once divided into two halves. The solid cement cylinder
commissioned by Speer in 1937 was the foundation of a
future that—thankfully—will never come to be; but given
its ponderous size and solidity, the cylinder, ironically, may
easily remain for a thousand years. These pasts are not simply
part of some long-gone, chronological history but exist—
simultaneously—in the spaces of the present. What’s muted
are the hopes and desires, anxieties and fears that were
embodied in the ways these vanished pasts imagined the
future. With few exceptions, all but the most strident voices
are lost, all but the most indelible memories are erased—and
even these are transient.
       The space of the modern metropolis is indissociable
from and profoundly shaped by the various media in which
it is represented, whether through novels, photography, film,
television, computer simulations, or geo-browsers like Goo-
gle Earth. City films, such as those by Walter Ruttmann, Dzi-
ga Vertov, and Sergei Eisenstein, gave rise to a new phenome-
nology of the city, as space was fragmented into its constitu-
tive parts and reassembled according to the perceptual con-
tingencies of the film maker. As Benjamin explained with
regard to film, the embodied experience of space and time
changed with the advent of this new medium: “Our taverns
and our metropolitan streets, our offices and furnished




29
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



rooms, our railroad stations and our factories appeared to
have us locked up hopelessly. Then came the film and burst
this prison-world asunder by the dynamite of the tenth of a
second, so that now, in the midst of its far-flung ruins and
debris, we calmly and adventurously go traveling. With the
close-up, space expands; with slow motion, movement is ex-
tended.”8 The embodied experiences of the nineteenth centu-
ry flâneur were now displaced by the non-contiguous, disem-
bodied representations of the city that can be seen or heard
from a distance, at varying tempos, and even in a new se-
quence. Not only is space transformed by new media, allow-
ing it to be apprehended and experienced in ways that were
previously not possible, but the figure of the flâneur is also
transformed, as spectatorship migrates to the screen and
eventually the computer interface. Today, we are all digital
dandies, and thus it is no coincidence that the figure of the
flâneur has frequently informed discussions of the co-consti-
tutive relationship between urban modernity and new media,
whether photography, film, computer simulations, or other
digital technologies.
       In film, the realism of urban space is reconfigured and
reordered through the principle of “the contiguity of the
non-contiguous.” In Ruttmann’s Berlin: Symphony of a Great
City (1928), objects, buildings, streetcars, train stations, facto-
ries, theaters, and entire neighborhoods of Berlin are re-
mapped through cinema and placed side-by-side as if contigu-
ous. The result is that the new media flâneur can experience
the city in a way that was simply not possible for Poe’s man of
the crowd or Baudelaire’s dandy, both of whom physically
walked around the built space of the city. Now, a viewer of Rut-
tmann’s film can travel through and experience Berlin syn-
chronically: filmed over a year, a single, twenty-four day is pre-
sented in an hour of film, and scores of physically non-contig-




30
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



uous locations are rendered consecutive and contiguous—pre-
cisely the way a traditional flâneur could never perceive or ex-
perience the city. “What if . . .” is the foundational principle of
navigation of the city in every age of new media.




HyperCities: A Very Brief History

2000: Web 1.0, the Readerly Web
      ( TP) The original idea for the digital mapping project

that would eventually become “HyperCities” was a research
initiative called “Berlin: Temporal Topographies” that was
begun around 2000 at the Stanford Humanities Laboratory.
Temporal topographies were just that: investigations of the
historical and time-based dimensions of places. The concept
refers to the inscription of time in space, the simultaneous




31
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



presence of different “time-layers” in a given location. The
initiative yielded an early website that sought to present a
multiplicity of pathways through the city. The pathways were
HTML web pages about aspects of Berlin’s cultural history,
illustrated with photographs and other digitized artifacts.
The idea was to eventually have many authors who created
pathways, some of which would intersect with one another,
and others of which would veer off in new directions. While
the project never matured beyond the initial website, it yield-
ed an array of conceptual approaches that would become
foundational for the burgeoning field of digital cultural map-
ping and the HyperCities project itself.
      In retrospect, I would call this project Berlin 1.0, the
readerly web, in which knowledge is presented to viewers
who are asked to consume it but not alter its conditions,
meaning-making strategies, and modes of production. The
readerly web is ultimately just that: a web of pages to be read,
a web governed by a singularity of meaning achieved
through a common set of naturalized practices of interaction
and consumption.

2004: Flash—Animating and Reanimating
the Readerly Web
      ( TP) In 2004, I designed a flash-based, digital textbook

called “Hypermedia Berlin” with the support of UCLA’s Cen-
ter for Digital Humanities. Tracing its historical genealogy
back to “database” projects such as Ruttmann’s city film and
Benjamin’s cultural history of nineteenth century Paris, the
goal of Hypermedia Berlin was to construct a web-based
platform for representing and studying the cultural, urban,
and architectural history of a layered city space. While Benja-
min attempted to create a montage text to investigate Paris,
we were using the technologies of new media to imagine a




32
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES




new study of city spaces and culture, something that Benja-                    (3)
min was ultimately unable to realize in the hand-written foli-
os he made for The Arcades Project. (Fig. 3)
      Deploying the organizing principle of “temporal topog-
raphies,” my team created a digital textbook for exploring
Berlin using a series of digitized historical maps that I manu-
ally georeferenced as the basis for experiencing the city’s his-
tory from 1237, when the city was founded, up through the
present day. But rather than taking chronology as the sole
organizing principle, I wanted to foreground the uneven
time-layers comprising Berlin’s nearly 800-year history, the
urban palimpsests, as it were, that form the present. “Hyper-
media Berlin” was completed in 2004 and allowed students to
                                                                   http://www.berlin.
navigate by both time and space through twenty-five inter-         ucla.edu/
linked maps of Berlin keyed to relevant “people“ and “place“       hypermedia




33
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



links. Students explored Berlin by zooming in and out of the
maps, scrolling—in any order—through some 800 years of
space and time, and clicking on various regions, neighbor-
hoods, blocks, buildings, and streets.
      Technically, the project was constructed in Flash, using
HTML popup windows, and a modified version of “Zoomify,”
a software program that allows viewers to zoom in and out of
particular locations of an image. A visitor might jump to the
Berlin of 1811 or 1850 and then proceed, by place, through
the Brandenburg Gate in 1962, 1936, and 1871. In each
“time-layer,” photographs, film clips, and popup “windows”
detail aspects of the cultural and architectural history of the
city at that moment, including extensive information about
key people in Berlin’s history. I taught the pilot version of “Hy-
permedia Berlin” at UCLA in the Spring of 2004 to a class of
65 undergraduate students. Applying the theory of the “simul-
taneity of the non-simultaneous” as an organizing principle,
every lecture began at a place in present-day Berlin (such as
Potsdamer Platz or the Olympic Stadium) and then proceed-
ed to “drill down” into the historical layers impacted in these
places. At any moment, students could stop and “travel” syn-
chronically or move backward or forward in time to other city
layers. The class seemed to elicit great curiosity, intellectual
excitement, and not a small bit of confusion.

2005: Geo-temporal Search and the Writerly Web
     ( TP) When Google released its Map API in the summer of

2005, a small revolution occurred: anyone with basic program-
ming skills could now integrate Google’s world map and the
accompanying satellite imagery into individual websites, create
and mark up maps using this imagery, and even develop new
software using the Google Maps application. An Application
Programming Interface (API) allows programmers to build on,




34
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



customize, and incorporate existing software code into their
own applications. Quite suddenly, the world of Geographic In-
formation Systems (GIS), a terrain that had been dominated for
decades by significantly more abstruse, desktop applications
such as ESRI’s ArcMap and ArcGIS, had been opened up to the
masses. Map mash-ups flourished almost overnight, as nearly
everyone with any sort of geo-data began making maps—of
their favorite restaurants, bike paths, and whale-watching spots.
Geo and time mark-up became indispensable metadata fields
for a vast array of web content, prompting Michael Jones, Goo-
gle’s Chief Technologist, to emend his company’s mission “to
geographically organize the world’s information and make it
universally accessible and useful.”9
       Built on the idea that every past is a place, HyperCities
came to life as a digital research and educational platform for
exploring, learning about, and interacting with the layered his-
tories of city and global spaces. Developed though collabora-
tion between UCLA, USC, CUNY, and numerous communi-
ty-based organizations, the fundamental idea behind Hyper-
Cities is that all histories “take place” somewhere and some-
time, and that they become more meaningful when they inter-
act and intersect with other histories. Through the Google
Maps and Earth APIs, HyperCities essentially allows users to
go back in time to create, narrate, and explore the historical
layers of city spaces and tell stories in an interactive, hyperme-
dia environment. Partner teams have developed content con-
nected to Los Angeles, New York, Berlin, Rome, Ollantaytam-
bo, Tehran, Mexico City, Wellington, and many more places,
big and small, urban and rural.
       The project asks two seemingly simple—but deeply
fraught and often contested—questions that are fundamental
to identity: Where are you from? What used to be here?
       The answers, of course, are far from simple or straight-




35
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



forward. As a globally-oriented platform that reaches deeply
into archival collections and links together a wide range of
media content (including photograph archives, 3D recon-
structions, historical and user-created maps, oral histories
and videos, GIS data, and community stories), HyperCities
seeks to transform how humanities scholarship is produced,
accessed, and shared, thereby yoking it to a public mission to
document and delve into places in time.
      When a user first visits Hypercities, what is shown is
Google’s satellite imagery of the world zoomed out to show
the “historical cities” featured in HyperCities. There is no
“starting” or “ending” point—just a digital globe and the
chance to explore and contribute. Each time the user moves
the map (zooms in, pans, jumps to a new city) or adjusts the
time-bar, the application interacts with one or more external
servers to retrieve relevant data based on the spatial and tem-
poral bounding coordinates. I likened this process to archae-
ological coring, in which a sample might be taken from a sin-
gle block or street over, say, 500 years, or perhaps a single city
over a day. Such a search and query process was intended to
simulate how visitors navigate a city with which they are not
familiar: you proceed down a given street, you look around,
and eventually you may even get lost. The flâneur in the age
of new media becomes a kind of digital dandy, navigating a
world that is open, under construction, and, to a certain ex-
tent, unknown.
      Beyond browsing, HyperCities became a tool for leav-
ing your own traces. With an emphasis on participatory
learning, users can add media objects, curate and share their
own collections, as well as view and link to other people’s
public collections. Users are able to add “micro-annotations”
by geotagging locations in time, such as Unter den Linden in
the year 1793, or the northwest corner of Leipzigerstrasse




36
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



and Wilhelmstrasse from 1920 to 1945. The rationale is that
these annotations contribute to the creation of a “people’s
history” of the city, leveraging the democratizing possibilities
of the web to create, display, and distribute information.
These annotations function collectively as “folksonomies,”
which complement academically generated taxonomies or
“expert” content.
      The birth of Web 2.0—the writerly web—has been well
articulated by technology gurus such as Tim O’Reilly as well
as leaders in the field of Digital Humanities such as Cathy
Davidson and David Theo Goldberg, both of whom have ad-
vocated for a more open and participatory humanities, what
might be called “Humanities 2.0.” 10 Such a term refers to the
generative humanities, a humanistic practice anchored in
creation, curation, collaboration, experimentation, and the
multi-purposing or multi-channeling of humanistic knowl-
edge. It places a primacy on participatory scholarship, open-
source models for sharing content and applications, iterative
development, and interdisciplinary collaboration. In so do-
ing, new communities—academic and the general public—
are involved in the production of scholarship. This collabora-
tion and interaction is at the heart of the HyperCities idea.



2009: AJAX and Web services
     ( TP) The HyperCities system architecture also follows

one of the central trends often identified as Web 2.0: the
front-end is almost entirely separated from its back-end. Al-
though a web-based platform, HyperCities behaves more like
a desktop application because the front-end follows an
event-driven programming model rather than a standard
webpage submission model. The platform is a collaboration
of web services, compiling digital content from disparate




37
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       sources through the use of XML, KML, JSON, and Javascript.
       The Google Maps/Earth APIs define a set of JavaScript ob-
       jects and methods, which HyperCities uses to put maps on
       its interface, allowing instant integration of satellite imagery
       with other layers such as markers, pathways, images, histori-
       cal maps, 3D objects, and other kinds of geo-data.
       The technical goal of HyperCities is to be a generalizable, easi-
       ly scalable data model for linking together and publishing geo-
       temporal content using a unified front-end delivery system
       and a distributed back-end architecture. HyperCities consists

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

       AJAX


       $.post(“./provider/objects/4023”, metadata, _updateReturn, “json”);



              ( DS) In the midst of a war for browser market share,

       Microsoft released a now-forgotten browser called Internet
       Explorer 5. One of IE5’s most memorable features was a
       new JavaScript object: XmlHttpRequest. This weirdly-
       named object (it rarely has anything to do with XML
       now) allowed a JavaScript developer to request new data
       without reloading a page. And thus, AJAX (an even greater
       awkwardness of a backronym, “Asynchronous JavaScript and
       XML”) was born, and with AJAX, Web 2.0: the entire fleet
       of Google apps, including Google Maps. And HyperCities. And
       social media, too: AJAX makes Facebook feasible (or would
       you rather reload the entire page every time you click
       “like”?), and finding your favorite restaurant on a map in
       Yelp (click to zoom out; reload the page).
              And yet, AJAX is an awkward beast. From a meaningless
       name to an inconsistently-implemented feature set to a
       constantly-evolving set of standards, AJAX has incredible




       38
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



of a geotemporal markup server and a front-end visualization
platform built on the Google Maps/Earth APIs that enables
users to explore, manipulate, and contribute to any geographi-
cally aware environment. At its core are databases of openly
accessible, geotemporal content represented by KML, a mark-
up language chosen because its development is funded by pri-
vate enterprise (Google) but governed by the Open Geospatial
Consortium, which ensures a robust user-base and an open-
source development model for specification and implementa-
tion. HyperCities generates real-time, KML-based network

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

power yet odd responsibility. With AJAX, web pages grew into
web applications. And now much anxiety is spent dealing
with the potential for security holes: one web page may not
make a request to a site on another domain—a page loaded on
hackerparadise.com may not (and should not) make a request to
gmail.com. This holds back developers who now see the web as
a paradise of open data easy for computers to parse: bringing
Twitter and Flickr streams together is far more difficult if
your page cannot read from both of these domains.
     Ajax makes the modern web possible. It allows a
developer to display a web page, get more data, and update
the page without reloading the entire page. It causes web
developers to think about sites as bits of data to expose
in a variety of formats—HTML, JSON, and XML. Or perhaps,
it makes the web less the web and more the operating
system: the web is no longer a set of pages of information
(Berners-Lee and Nelson’s vision) but a set of interfaces
to data. APIs matter more when there’s no page for a
search engine to read. Thus, perhaps, AJAX has made the
web more interactive and less human-readable.




39
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       links connected to geotemporal content, offering a non-exclu-
       sive front-end for contributing to, organizing, and exploring
       independent repositories. While HyperCities hosts and stores
       some data locally, one of the central aims of the project is to
       host metadata connections to content stored and maintained
       in external repositories and on external servers. These servers
       range from commercially available platforms (such as Google’s
       3D warehouse, YouTube, and Flickr) to library and archival
       platforms for maps, GIS data, oral histories, videos, photo-
       graph collections, and other media files. In this way, HyperCit-
       ies provides connective tissue for the community of geospatial
       time travelers by leveraging the extensive development of data
       repositories and social networks.
             The server back-end (written in PHP and running off a
       MySQL database) is limited to pulling new data to display and

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

       From the Docuverse to the Dataverse: APIs

       response = simplejson.load(urllib.urlopen(
                   “http://search.twitter.com/search.json?q=obama”))
       for tweet in response[“results”]:
           for tag1,tag2 in itertools.combinations(r”#([\w\d]+)”, tweet[“text”])):
               tag_network[tag1][tag2] += 1
       …
       communities = louvain(tag_network)
       simplejson.dump(communities, response)




            ( DS) The opening ceremonies of the 2012 Olympics

       contained a performance called “Frankie and June say ‘Thanks
       Tim’,” a tribute to Tim Berners-Lee’s invention of the World
       Wide Web, which brought the eponymous protagonists together.
       At the end of the show, a house in the center of the stage
       lifted to reveal Berners-Lee himself at a computer. One
       wonders if, as he waved to the crowd, what passed through
       his head was that the messages Frankie and June sent on
       their smartphones were not part of the original web he had




       40
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



inputting any changes a user might make to the objects being
displayed. The front-end is almost a complete application itself
because it contains all the display logic. We might think of it as
a viewer for certain data formats, the same way KML can be
viewed in Google Earth, ArcMap, and a host of other GIS ap-
plications. It is not only fairly easy to use HyperCities with dif-
ferent data sources, but it is also possible to pull the data from
the back-end into any geographically aware environment.

2011: Social Media Mapping
      ( TP) Social media refer to a broad category of participa-

tory communication and information technologies with (po-
tentially) global diffusion of information sharing and data
exchange. While it’s easy to dismiss social media (Twitter,
Facebook, YouTube, etc.) as superficial and amateurish, it is

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

imagined: Berners-Lee’s web was a set of documents people
read with their eyes, not with their iPhone apps. What the
web looks more and more like now is a series of APIs, in
which data is exposed for machines to parse and interpret
for humans.
     APIs, or Application Programming Interfaces, are
standards by which programs or web sites expose data for
other programs’ consumption. Facebook, Google Maps, Yelp,
Twitter, and Flickr (to name just a few) expose their data
through APIs. The smartphone apps market and social media
could not exist without APIs; one of Twitter’s biggest
uses is applications built on its own API. With the
proliferation of APIs, we can make the claim that data is
much easier to repurpose than software.
     But what can you really do with an API? All APIs have




41
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       becoming evident that they can be harnessed both singularly
       and in aggregate to fundamentally transform participation
       and even the notion of the public sphere. Part of the reason is
       that social media differ profoundly from traditional broadcast
       media such as newspapers, radio, television, and film by dint
       of their decentralization of authority, public accessibility, dif-
       fusion, ease of use, immediacy, scale, and, oftentimes, ephem-
       erality. As the 2011 protests in North Africa and the Middle
       East have made clear, social media have changed the ways in
       which news and information are disseminated across the
       world and raised fundamental questions about who consti-
       tutes the public sphere, how we know and characterize histor-
       ical change, and how we develop critical lenses for assessing
       social media that neither reduce them to epiphenomena nor
       naively celebrate them as the realization of digital democracy.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

       designs that consciously limit their purposes. We cannot
       harvest tweets more than seven days old, presumably so that
       Twitter’s engineers can limit the amount of data the API
       ever has to access to a predictable amount, instead of the
       incomprehensible sublime of all tweets. Google Maps targets
       developers implementing “store locator” features: it assumes
       developers will want to identify a limited number of points,
       and does not implement GIS standards for exchanging large
       volumes of data. APIs also come with restrictions that govern
       the access of the company’s data through a set of windows
       into the Master’s house.
              Many APIs suffer from a technical flaw, a feature
       I call the search-focus model. Most follow the REST
       (REpresentational State Transfer) model, proposed by Roy
       Fielding. In REST, each “thing” (a tweet, a Facebook status,




       42
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



      Since 2011, our team has developed a contemporary
mapping project called “HyperCities Now,” which geolocates,
streams, and archives social media data from providers such
as Twitter, YouTube, and Flickr. The project began with the
protests in Tahrir Square in late January of 2011: what if we
could listen to, map, and amplify the voices in the streets of
Cairo in real-time and, then, archive those voices for scholars
to study in the future? To do so, “HyperCities Now” began to
stream and capture real-time social media feeds related to
events from places around the world. We have archives of
more than 450,000 tweets from Egypt over about 18 days of
the Revolution, nearly a half-million from Libya, 660,000 in
the weeks following the earthquake and tsunami in Japan,
and hundreds of thousands from other events around the
world, ranging from Anzac Day 2011 in New Zealand to the

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

a picture) is a “resource,” and has its own URL, which
allows it to be accessed and modified. Developers discover
resources through a search and then focus on one resource to
read or modify. This granularity has limits: it’s harder to
retrieve or access multiple items at once. It takes multiple
queries to a RESTful API to alter the locations of multiple
photographs, or to retrieve the profiles of many users who
tweet with a particular hashtag. REST, a beautiful form in
Fielding’s dissertation, provides the developer with a small
toolset. REST can be both an opportunity and a challenge
to developers, restricting the scale and scope of their
ambitions. Ironically, this increases the load on companies
who serve APIs.
     All this results, indirectly, from Berners-Lee’s
original work. He started us on the road to REST by




43
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       2011 riots in London, and most recently, millions of tweets
       from Hurricane Sandy, the Boston marathon bombings, and
       the 2013 protests in Turkey.11
             Unlike broadcast news in which a reporter “goes on lo-
       cation” to retrieve the story, social media allow users to broad-
       cast their own experiences in real-time from a place they are
       currently in. In this regard, it creates a new public sphere of
       voices and listeners who would never have been able to “hear”
       one another. We archived about 40,000 unique voices coming
       out of Egypt over the 18 days of protests and more than
       200,000 unique voices from Japan. As an interactive, qualita-
       tive visualization, the goal of HyperCities Now is to fore-
       ground the ephemeral individual voice as it flashes up on the
       screen every few seconds, but it also gives users the power to
       listen to and analyze a staggering cacophony of voices

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

       developing the protocol that these APIs use, HTTP (HyperText
       Transfer Protocol). In HTTP, a resource (like a webpage,
       or a tweet), has a “URL” (Uniform Resource Locator), which
       can be accessed using a “method.” Berner-Lee’s original
       specification, HTTP 0.9, had only one method, GET: readers’
       browsers would GET a page for them to read. Documents arrived
       on the web through protocols beyond the web itself.
              HTTP 1.0 added the “POST” method, which made the
       web interactive. POST allowed users to POST data to
       an interactive program masquerading as a web page, and
       get back content based on what they had submitted—such
       as airplane tickets or a new blog POST. POST made the
       web interactive, and most content creation through
       APIs happens through POST. (Nowadays, we have twenty-
       five other methods, but GET and POST are the most




       44
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



through geo- and time-encoded data. At the project’s core are
values central to the next wave of digital humanities: harness-
ing new technologies to expand the global public sphere, ani-
mating the archive in new ways, and using technologies to
increase the impact, relevance, and importance of humanistic
ideas in an ever-shifting world stage.

2013: Endgame—The HyperCities API
      ( TP) HyperCities has evolved into two components: a

storage engine for geotemporal narratives and a browser for
viewing these narratives. The API began as a separate project
for accessing data within HyperCities using other clients. As
such, the API offered the potential to repurpose the data to
work with collaborating groups who wanted to import new
data without using the geo-browser and/or read it from other

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

widely supported.) GET made users readers; POST made
users writers and consumers, or whatever we might call
those who submit (another strange word at the bottom
of web forms) data for Facebook to track (the consumed
consumer?).
     Instead of web pages for human beings to read, RESTful
APIs make web sites into interfaces to data. APIs matter more
when there’s no page for a search engine to read, or the
data is locked down behind corporate walls. Now, we build
applications to trawl through APIs for information. As the
web has become more interactive, we require more technology
to interact with the web. This is no longer a docuverse, but
a dataverse.




45
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       clients. Over time, the idea of completely separating the
       back-end from the front-end became a goal, as it seemed to
       be a sensible way of preserving the data and allowing others
       to develop customized user experiences. In other words, we
       wanted users to be able to create, populate, and maintain
       their own instances of HyperCities. Ultimately, these multiple
       instances might form a “constellation” of sites that knew

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

       The HyperCities Network/Nexus

       http://hypercities.ats.ucla.edu/provider/collections?text=procession

       http://hypercities.ats.ucla.edu/provider/collections/23077

       http://hypercities.ats.ucla.edu/provider/collections/23077.kml

       http://hypercities.ats.ucla.edu/provider/earth/collections/23077



               ( DS) If you use something like the URL above, you

       can search for data or download the data from a specific
       collection in HyperCities. You can even modify it, provided
       you have the privileges. You can download your collection as
       a KML file, edit it, and re-upload it. All this is due to the
       magic of the HyperCities API.
               APIs make data consumable in other forms. A mobile
       application, another website, a desktop application, and the
       like can all read and edit the same data source. The public
       interface of HyperCities, what you see when you launch the
       application, is just one interface to our storage engine.
               Consuming and providing APIs, HyperCities is part of
       a network. On the consumption end, we acquire map imagery
       from Google as well as ArcGIS and WMS-compliant map servers.
       On the producing end, HyperCities can export collections as
       standard KML files or as KML tours to play in Google Earth.
       HyperCities is a storage engine and an interface, and the




       46
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



about and recognized one another, allowing data to be found
and shared across the constellation.
      While motivated by an intellectual goal, our repurpos-
ing of the API began in earnest around the time that Google
announced that version two of the Maps API would no lon-
ger be supported. Google Maps version three has a complete-
ly different architecture from version two, and we realized

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

two are designed to communicate only through a specific
interface, namely—the API. HyperCities is a nexus of parts,
connective tissue between APIs. Why reuse code this way?
Using others’ APIs requires us to write and maintain less
code, but it also creates a fragile network of dependencies,
a house of cards in code. HyperCities is both part of a
network of interrelated tools, and a network itself.
     And yet, when APIs change, the cost of the network
becomes apparent. Attempting to upgrade to version three of the
Google Maps API has taken months and months of developer time;
it was less an upgrade and more a rewrite. We didn’t succeed,
and so we decided to divorce HyperCities from its dependence on
Google by allowing the developer community to create instances
of HyperCities that run on any map front-end.
     Even with all these points of failure, networking
APIs make each part less vulnerable. With the API, even if
we fail to do the upgrade, data will still be accessible
through the server API. Google Earth should still read
the tours HyperCities produces. Modular parts both make a
network possible and also insulate themselves from too much
exposure to the network; this networked, API-focused design
negotiates a tension between independence, interdependency,
and addiction. HyperCities is all of these things.




47
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



the upgrade would require a massive rewrite of the Hyper-
Cities application. Because the front-end relied on compo-
nents we could not control and which changed all-too-fre-
quently (the Google Maps API and the Google Earth plugin),
the project was inherently fragile. We realized that another
way to preserve the data against changes in the front-end was
to make it possible to present the data in a variety of formats.
This shifted the problem of preservation from one of main-
taining the visual representations of HyperCities data to
opening it to a variety of visual representations using differ-
ent tools. It also allowed members of the developer commu-
nity the opportunity to set up, administer, and customize
their own HyperCities instances.
      As the final stage of the HyperCities project, the team
released the source code to the storage engine and the browser
as open source projects, available on GitHub, a public source
code hosting website, with a fully documented RESTful API.
Among other things, it may function as a robust KML editor
for geotemporal content. We imagine the final life of Hyper-
Cities will be as a publicly-available tool that can be installed
on any server for accessing and storing geotemporal data and
associated narratives. Users will have access to the API for de-
veloping their own clients and modifying the storage engine to
work with other geo-browsers, something that will help to pre-
serve data stored in HyperCities by making the data easier to
port between formats that each browser can read. As such, de-
velopers may create new instantiations of HyperCities and
thus make new kinds of geotemporal narratives.
      With this consumer-agnostic API, HyperCities data is
no longer a tenant of only Google’s world; a developer may
write a program for viewing a HyperCities collection using
code and imagery from another provider. For example, the
open-source mapping library OpenLayers can incorporate




48
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



imagery from OpenStreetMap licensed under the Open Data
Commons Open Database License. We have also written an
OpenLayers-based browser, which has been released as an
open source project and provides an opportunity for creating
a HyperCities “liberated” from Google. Even if the master’s
tools cannot dismantle the master’s house, separating these
two components gives us our choice of masters, and allows
us to open our doors to others.



Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities

     ( TP) Until recently, mapping in the humanities was deep-
ly bifurcated between what might be called, on the one hand,
a “quantitative” approach using data analysis and visualiza-
tion techniques adopted from the field of Geographic Infor-
mation Systems (GIS, for short), and, on the other, what might
be called “metaphorical mapping,” variously articulated in cul-
tural studies through theorizations of space and place, cri-
tiques of spatial systems, and critical cartography studies. The
first is often dismissed as “positivistic,” as uncritically import-
ing methods of the social sciences into the interpretative and
critical domain of the humanities with insufficient regard to
the ideological biases of such information and visualization
systems. At the same time, the second is dismissed by practi-
tioners of spatial analysis on the grounds that it never actually
engages with any spatial methods or mapping tools, neither
designing environments for analysis nor creating “humanis-
tic” systems for probing spatial relations.
       Over the past couple of years, blended approaches have
started to emerge in the digital humanities, which situate and
investigate historical questions on spatial platforms, without
uncritically embracing or cavalierly dismissing GIS. Richard




49
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



Marciano and David Theo Goldberg’s “T-RACES” project, for
example, brings together the history of redlining maps pro-
duced by the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation in the 1930s
with archival documents linked to census tract, in order to
reveal the complex ways in which exclusionary spaces were
created throughout the US to preserve racial homogeneity.13
Here, a massive archive of American racial history has been
geo- and temporally marked-up in a discovery and historical
visualization platform built on the Google Maps engine. An-
other project, “Digital Harlem,” also a historical mapping ar-
chive, was developed by four historians at the University of
Sidney (Stephen Garton, Stephen Robertson, Graham White,
and Shane White) “to visualize and explore the spatial di-
mensions of everyday life in Harlem during its heyday, 1915–
1930.”14 To do so, the team created a series of dynamically
populated, searchable map layers organized into three me-
ta-categories: people, places, and events. Users can mix and
match materials on historical maps and discover correlations,
patterns, and trends that would not be discernible without
tools for spatial analysis. Other projects—such as the US Ho-
locaust Memorial Museum’s Darfur genocide map and
George Mason’s Archive of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita—
utilize the Google Maps/Earth platforms to document and
investigate contemporary crises with participatory dimen-
sions for the contribution of data.
      Beyond Google, OpenLayers, an open source mapping
platform with a global developer community, and Harvard’s
WorldMap, an ambitious, open source platform for explor-
ing, visualizing, and publishing geographic information, are
setting new standards for the preservation, dissemination,
and analysis of networked geo-data. At the same time, major
“spatial research centers” crossing the humanities, architec-
ture, urban planning, geography, and design have begun to




50
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



crop up, such as Harvard’s Center for Geographic Analysis,
Stanford’s Spatial History Project (part of its Center for Spa-
tial and Textual Analysis), Duke’s Wired! Group (focused on
dynamic visualizations of the past through modeling and
design of urban environments), Columbia’s Spatial Informa-
tion Design Lab, MIT’s Senseable City Lab, UCLA’s Experien-
tial Technologies Center, and multi-institutional collabora-
tions such as the Virtual Center for Spatial Humanities. Each
supports a range of spatial projects built on interdisciplinary
methodologies coming from computational analysis and GIS,
interactive design and four-dimensional modeling, informa-
tion visualization, and statistical processing—all of which are
part of the burgeoning field of “digital humanities.”
      The HyperCities project is part of this blended trend.
HyperCities essentially allows users to examine the historical
layers of city spaces and tell stories in an interactive, hyper-
media environment. The central theme is geotemporal argu-
mentation, an endeavor that cuts across a multitude of disci-
plines and relies on new forms of visual, cartographic, and
time/space-based narrative strategies. To date, HyperCities
features rich content on more than two dozen world cities,
including more than 400 georeferenced historical maps,
thousands of user-generated maps, and tens of thousands of
curated collections, narratives, and media objects created by
users in the academy and general public.



The Spatial Turn in the Humanities
     ( TP) When Edward Said published Culture and Imperial-

ism in 1993, he justifiably maintained that “most cultural his-
torians, and certainly all literary scholars, have failed to re-
mark the geographical notation, the theoretical mapping and
charting of territory that underlies Western fiction, historical




51
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



writing, and philosophical discourses of the time.”15 Accord-
ing to Said, cultural criticism needs to “affirm both the pri-
macy of geography and an ideology about the control of ter-
ritory” (78). Why? In order to fully appreciate and critique
the spatial matrix of modernity constituted by the broad
forces of nationalism, imperialism, and colonialism. Moder-
nity, for Said, is not merely a temporal indicator or periodiz-
ing concept but very much about specific colonial histories
of power and control exerted on bodies in places.
       In Said’s wake, much work has been done in the hu-
manities—particularly in transnational and post-colonial
studies—to examine the “spatial strata” of cultural produc-
tion and power: one need only think of studies such as
Paul Gilroy’s “black Atlantic,” Arjun Appadurai’s “global eth-
noscapes,” Homi Bhahba’s “location of culture,” James Clif-
ford’s anthropological study of “routes,” Saskia Sassen’s and
David Harvey’s studies of the global diffusion of capital,
Fredric Jameson’s “geopolitical aesthetic” and (somewhat un-
der-theorized) notion of “cognitive mapping,” Franco Moret-
ti’s map-based analyses of the “spaces of literature,” Stephen
Greenblatt’s call for “mobility studies” to focus on questions
of diaspora, exile, and displacement in literary and languages
studies, not to mention renewed attention to psycho-geogra-
phies, imaginary landscapes, and practices of détournement
rooted in situationist ideas of urban engagement and cogni-
tive dissonance. And in the wake of Derrida and Foucault,
poststructuralist notions of the instability of signifying practic-
es and critiques of power dynamics have been rigorously taken
up in the expansive fields of critical cartography studies and
geography, as the work of J. B. Harley, Edward Soja, John Pick-
les, Denis Cosgrove, and others attests. And more recently, as
both of these fields have deepened their interaction with visual
studies, digital humanities, historical GIS, and information vi-




52
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



sualization, new areas of research have been catalyzed at the
nexus of mapping technologies, politics, and design through
the work of scholars such Laura Kurgan, Trevor Paglen, Anne
Knowles, Annette Kim, Bill Rankin, and many others.
       While this “spatial turn” in the humanities has clearly
fostered many differentiated approaches to analyzing and
mapping the imbrication of culture/power/space, what has
been missing—at least up until recently—is a fundamental
rethinking of the medium in which cultural criticism and his-
torical investigations are undertaken. In other words, we can-
not adequately study spatial systems, mapping conventions,
landscapes of power and control, colonial networks, histories
of emplacement and displacement, cultural flows and hemor-
rhages, sites of memory and oblivion without considering the
media in which to map the complex interplay between lived
and experienced spaces, representational spaces, and imagi-
nary spaces. In fact, if we cast this problem more broadly,
what’s at stake is the attention to media, materiality, and
method in humanities scholarship, the very fundamental
ways in which cultural-historical questions are articulated,
investigated, and emplotted as arguments.
       Bringing together spatial-temporal narratives, visual
design and argumentation, embodied navigation, and curato-
rial strategies to imagine new modalities of engaging with
the past and the present, these issues have been catalyzed by
the digital humanities subfield variously called “Spatial Hu-
manities,” “digital cultural mapping,” or simply “thick map-
ping.” What if the many, competing pasts saturated in a single
place could be mapped onto and along streets, neighbor-
hoods, and territories? What if, following Edward Casey, cul-
ture was reconnected to place and the movement of bodies
in space and through time?16 To do so, we need a methodolo-
gy and a medium that foregrounds time-layers, or sediment-




53
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



ed palimpsests, such that histories become proliferated as
intertwining layers, making it possible to tell more than one
story at the same time, or any number of possible stories.
This does not mean that “anything goes” or that “what actual-
ly happened” no longer matters; instead, it gives way to richly
interactive, multiplied stories in which the singularity of nar-
rative succession has been abandoned in favor of extensible
digital spaces that variously map, intersect with, and also dis-
rupt physical, embodied spaces.



Zoom and Thickness as Historical Methods
      ( TP) Let’s look at a Pharus map of Berlin from 1926. It is

an extraordinarily detailed, five-colored, ink-printed map of
Berlin, in which prominence is given to significant German
architectural monuments and transportation networks (in-
cluding railways, subways, and express roads). The former are
represented as miniature, three-dimensional models, rendered
in black ink and dusted with a brownish-gold tint: the Reich-
stag, the Victory Column, the Royal Castle, the Berlin Cathe-
dral, and the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church, among oth-
ers. And over the map, we see railway stations rendered in red
with their connecting lines spread out across the city. Interest-
ingly, the main stations—Potsdamer, Anhalter, and Lehrter—
have accompanying signs indicating their possible destina-
tions both in Germany and beyond: Cologne, Frankfurt, Mu-
nich, and Hamburg, but also Paris, Basel, Vienna, and Saint
Petersburg. Not only is Berlin connected to an international
network of cities throughout Europe, but one can travel to
these cities in any order one wants: from the Anhalter train
station, Basel comes before Leipzig and Munich comes before
Dresden. As part of an interconnected network, they do not
demand a definitive order or a unitary direction; instead, they




54
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



can be experienced in any number of new temporal and spa-
tial configurations. (Figs. 4 / 5)
       Walter Benjamin surely saw maps like this, maybe even
this one, as Pharus printed the most popular folding maps
during the 1920s and 1930s, and is especially well-known for
its pocket-sized maps of Berlin for the 1936 Olympics. In
fact, Benjamin references a Pharus map in passing in his city
montage, One-Way Street, a text that was completed in the
same year, 1926, and uses the street as its organizing princi-
ple.17 But unlike the Pharus Map, in which one can actually
follow the procession of a street much like the movement of
a flâneur, Benjamin’s urban meditations do not easily map
onto the city or its traditional, cartographic representations.
In One-Way Street, for example, the narrative begins quite
zoomed in at the street level, at a filling station, before mov-
ing into a breakfast room, the Number 113, a visit to Goethe’s
house, memories of Chinese curios, the Mexican embassy,
and a construction site. While many of these vignettes may
have been derived or distilled from the vast signifiers of the
urban landscape—“this space for rent,” “Optician,” “Lost-and-
Found Office,” “Post no bills!” and so forth—these signifiers
certainly do not add up to produce a map that looks any-
thing like the Pharus map. Instead, they offer various optics
for seeing, remembering, and narrating the urban space, op-
tics that are a function of experience, perception, and zoom
level. For Benjamin, zoom becomes a historical method for
narrating the city: zoomed in means close reading and close
analysis of details, whereas zoomed out means macro-level,
comparative perspectives. Zoomed out, one discerns struc-
tures and patterns of the city as a whole but compromises
texture and precision; zoomed in, one sees locally but loses
the view of the whole. Of course, there is no reason to privi-
lege a single level of zoom; rather, we ought to consider




55
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



“zoomability” as a way of investigating space, one that is fur-
ther enabled by (but not limited to) digital mapping and,
thereby, considers history as places to be mapped, as sites for
the emplotment of narratives as cartographies.
       At the same time that he made use of zoom, Benjamin
was also concerned with things unrepresented on and absent
from the Pharus map: social and economic structures, child-
hood memories, emotions, fleeting images, tastes and smells,
noises, textures, and other somatic experiences. One map is
not “more realistic” or “more accurate” than the other; in-
stead, we have different interpretative and symbolic systems
for representing the spatio-temporal order of modernity: a
planimetric map and a mental map.18 Through various strate-
gies of selection, visualization, and interpretation, both pro-
duce the space that they ostensibly represent. The Pharus
map is part of a spatio-temporal order that stretches back at
least to the eighteenth century and has become naturalized
in its cultural redundancy, utilitarian value, and political effi-




56
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES




                                           (4) / (5)




57
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



cacy: we have become used to looking at maps with a bird’s
eye perspective, a grid-like organization of streets, framed
boundaries, a clear coordinate system, planimetric accuracy,
and alignment to true north.19 The birth of cartographic rea-
son is inextricable from the history of the territoriality of the
nation-state, both its internal linkages and expansive—impe-
rial and global—ambitions.20 The critical question remains:
how can such a map (and, thereby, the construction of its his-
tory and the history of what it represents) be deconstructed
and re-animated—that is to say, opened to the infinite num-
ber of non-simultaneous histories contained in every street,
structure, and building, the innumerable voices and bodies
that made these histories through their interactions and con-
tingent encounters in such spaces?
      While the Pharus map abstracts and excludes the kinds
of experiences that Benjamin privileges in all of his city re-
flections, it is organized by the logic of a particularly modern
spatio-temporal system in which the temporality of experi-
ence and expectation are both bound up and broken apart
from one another. Every significant architectural monument
and building is depicted in exactly the same way, as if to cast
them all as part of the permanence of the past or the inheri-
tance of history, what Benjamin calls, unsympathetically,
“their enshrinement as heritage” (Arcades Project, 473). The
past is given value because it is inherited, and every structure,
even the most recent, is endowed with the temporality of the
oldest (in this case, the Royal Castle), resulting in a kind of
leveling effect in which the non-simultaneous becomes si-
multaneous. What is far more relevant for Benjamin’s city-
scapes and a central part of the “thick mapping” imagined
here are the non-simultaneous, fractured histories that
co-exist as “time layers” in any given present.
      And there is another, decidedly modern spatio-tempo-




58
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



ral logic operating on the Pharus map: namely, the reconfigu-
ration of space and time ushered in by the railway system. It
would have made little sense to indicate Paris, Basel, Vienna,
or even Leipzig and Hamburg on a Berlin map prior to the
mid-nineteenth century. While these places could obviously
be approached by carriage (something that easily took days),
one didn’t think of them as places already “in” Berlin. On this
map, the railway stations are like worm-holes: one goes in at
Berlin and pops out in Paris. It is not coincidental, then, that
Pharus privileged the railway system on the map, as there
was arguably no technology of modernity that had more of
an impact on the reconfiguration of space and time than the
railway. In 1843, with the opening of a number of major rail
lines around Paris, the poet Heinrich Heine famously de-
clared railways to be “providential events” because they
“killed” space and intimated the coming death of time.21
       The “new time” (Neuzeit) of modernity was both a break
from the eschatological temporality of the past and the insti-
tution of a new, world standard time, something precipitated
as early as 1842 in London with the creation of railway time-
tables. Acceleration, progress, and speed became the mottoes
of the modern world, leading to the construction of an inter-
connected, globalized world in which Paris could be in Ber-
lin and vice-versa. The material superstructures of modernity
made of iron and glass were built to showcase transcendental
size, speed, and mobility, but they also harbored this world’s
destructive capacities. The railway system is a fundamentally
dialectical construction, embodying the hopes and dreams of
the nineteenth century as well as the horror and catastrophes
of the twentieth.
       This dialectic is something that punctuates Benjamin’s
writings in exile, as he constructs a commemorative, imagi-
native geography of German places no longer occupied by




59
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities




Jewish bodies. In 1932, having already left Germany, Benja-
min imagines setting his life out on a map. Exile becomes a
site of displacement from which to imagine another history
as well as to map out his own life. In the early drafts that he
made for his chronicle of Berlin, he writes: “I have long, in-
deed for years, played with the idea of setting out the sphere
of life—bios—graphically on a map. First I envisaged an or-
dinary map, but now I would incline to a general staff ’s map
of a city center, if such a thing existed.”22 He then goes on to
mention things he would mark in his “system of signs” in a
kind of classification scheme or legend: houses of friends and
girlfriends, assembly halls, hotel and brothel rooms, benches




60
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



                        in the Tiergarten, prestigious cafes,
                        and what he calls “street images” from
                        “lived Berlin” (597). The idea of setting
                        these out in a General Staff ’s map is
                        striking, as these kinds of maps were
                        produced for military campaigns to
                        illuminate the topographical features
                        of the landscape, including informa-
                        tion about populations and transpor-
                        tation networks. As far as I know, no
                        such map of Benjamin’s life has sur-
                        faced, although one could certainly
                        argue that all of his experimental writ-
                        ings on travel and urban space (from
                        the early city portraits to the Arcades
                        Project) were attempts to not only map
                        his life but also to think through what
                        it might mean to write history in
                        graphic form, to map culture and spa-
                        tialize history, to bring together the      (6)
                        experience, representation, and pro-
duction of space. It is an avowedly non-mimetic, anti-devel-
                   23


opmental, non-linear model of imagining history as places to
be mapped, one which is rooted in exile, displacement, and
the disembodiment of the German/Jewish experience.
      In recollecting “images” of his childhood in Berlin, Ben-
jamin pauses on one train station in Berlin in particular: the
Anhalter Bahnhof. When it was rebuilt and reopened in 1881,
it was the largest, most expensive, and most opulent station in
Europe. He writes: “The Anhalter terminus [refers to] the
mother cavern of railroad stations, as its name suggested—
where locomotives were at home and trains had to stop [an-
halten]. No distance was more distant than when its rails con-




61
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities




verged in the mist.”24 To Benjamin the railway was the reality
of that marvelous and equally dubious nineteenth-century
dream of progress characterized by, among other things, the
possibility of connecting to a faraway place; it is where he rec-
ollects leave-taking from the city and arrival back at his child-
hood home. The Anhalter was also where Franz Kafka arrived
from Prague when he visited Felice Bauer in Berlin; it’s where
Paul Celan stopped over on his way to Paris from Czernowitz
on the day after Kristallnacht. In the 1930s thousands of Jew-
ish children were sent on trains from Berlin’s Anhalter Bahn-
hof to safety outside of Germany; and in 1941–42 the station
was used to gather elderly Jewish “transports” who were de-




62
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



                             ported to the concentration camp        (7)
                             of Theresienstadt. Although the
                             iron and glass roof of the station
                             collapsed during one of the last
                             bombing raids of Berlin, the sta-
                             tion was not completely destroyed,
                             and, after the war, trains began
                             running again as of August of
                             1945. They continued to run until
                             1952 when the tracks were cut by
                             the division of Berlin and later by
                             the erection of the Wall. After
                             much debate, the ruined station
                             was razed in 1961. Most of its re-
                             mains were disposed of in the early
                             1960s, except for part of the front
                             portal and the southbound railway
                             tracks. These tracks were left to the
                             forces of nature since their last use
                             on May 17, 1952. For more than
                             five decades, birch trees grew be-
tween the ruined tracks. It was not until 2008 that the urban
wasteland between the former Anhalter and Potsdamer train
stations was finally cleaned up and reclaimed by the city of
Berlin for another future. (Figs. 6 / 7)
      In this highly constricted but thickly layered place, one
can move diachronically—much like archaeological coring—
through a remarkable band of German/Jewish history, trac-
ing contingent moments of encounter, interaction, mobility,
and destruction. Although no longer visible, each time-layer
coexists in this stratified place, from which one can move
forward or backward. At the same time, one can also proceed
synchronically, stopping at a particular time and moving




63
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



horizontally through space, noting the closeness of the An-
halter train station to other layered structures and streets in
Berlin, such as the Gestapo Headquarters on Prinz Albrecht-
strasse in 1944 or Felice Bauer’s home in 1912. In this sense,
the time-layers of the Anhalter station open downward as
well as laterally, calling up the possibility of an infinite num-
ber of stories and encounters—in other words, thick maps.
Like so many fraught, overdetermined places in Berlin, one
discovers, in Benjamin’s words, “the crystal of the total event”
(Arcades Project, 461), the dialectic of modernity.
      What would it mean, then, to produce a cartographic
history of modernity, not simply a history of modernity in
maps but rather a practice of history that was spatial, a way
of understanding events and cultural encounters by plotting
them thickly onto maps? 25 This line of thinking opens up an
investigation of how modernity is not just a temporal desig-
nation (as in Neuzeit) but also a practice of cartographic rea-
soning, spatial representation, and geographic persuasion
and control. We might call it Neuraum (“new space”). It was
Michelet, after all, who famously declared that “history is first
of all geography.”26 And so by “thick mapping,” I mean this
quite literally: creating and interrogating maps, time-layers
(Zeitschichten), spatial imaginaries, and geographies of move-
ment and encounter in order to create geotemporal narratives
that follow the expansive and particular spatial logic of a rail-
way map, not unlike the “worm-hole” on the map that con-
nects Berlin to Paris at the Anhalter Bahnhof in 1926.
If one takes space (rather than time) as the prerequisite of
historical narrative, it becomes impossible to write unidirec-
tional, developmental stories; instead, there is a nearly in-
finite proliferation of perspectives, stories, interactions, and
possibilities. What would it mean to produce narratives that
looked more like railway systems or webs, with a multiplicity




64
THE HUMANITIES IN THE DIGITAL HUMANITIES



of connecting segments, branches, nodes, and possible path-
ways to get from “here” to “there”? The result is a labyrinthine
structure in which straying and contingency are the method-
ological starting points. The necessity of chronology, prog-
ress, teleology—or just the gentle, forward movement of a
historical argument—gives way to spaces of possibility. It
makes little sense to speak of “before” or “after” or necessity
as a modality of movement; instead, we get temporally lay-
ered, spaces of possibility, marked by distance and proximity,
contingency, simultaneity, and networks of connection. Not
only can readers or viewers insert themselves at multiple
points and look for their own orientation but the narratives
themselves are multilayered, fractured, and open-ended.
Thick mapping begins to look like an ever-expanding railway
system that moves out and downward at the same time, giv-
ing rise to a participatory web of intersecting cities, voices,
streets, memories, and narratives. This is the “humanities
idea” behind the HyperCities digital mapping project.




65
W
1


Book
Los Angeles Ghost Maps




Ghost Map:                                   Downtown / Los Angeles, California, circa 0
Geveronga-Yaanga / El Pueblo de Nuestra      C.E. to 2000 C.E. Cartography and data by
Señora Reina de Los Angeles / La Placita /   Phil Ethington, 2010.


           66
WINDOWS




67
W
1




Every act recounted by historians          generations to come. It becomes a
literally took place. All human ac-        topos, a reference-point in the vast
tions and experiences take place,          network of human knowledge.
in the sense that, embodied, they          Making places, people inscribe
cannot be placeless, but also in the       their material landscape with
sense of seizing the site of their         meaning. To the extent that these
occurrence and marking it for              inscriptions endure, places are




Map Call-Out 1:                            the Four-Level, 1997. 1935 photography
Figueroa Specters, 1935, 1940, 1997.       by the Los Angeles Bureau of Engineering.
Top row: Figueroa between Temple           Watercolor and ink drawings by the Works
and Sunset, underneath the Four-Level      Progress Administration (WPA) and the
Interchange, looking west. Bottom Rows:    Los Angeles Planning Department, 1940.
same location, looking east. Middle Row:   1997 Photography and photomontage, Phil
Houseless community dwelling beneath       Ethington, 1997.


           68
WINDOWS




dynamic accretions of meaningful                Each place is a unique con-
actions. If the past is the landscape   figuration of power and people
of what took place, then writing        who share living ecologies with the
history, as representing, recount-      natural world. In Ghost Metropo-
ing, and narrating the paths of our     lis, I narrate and explain the topoi
ancestors in that landscape, is in-     through which we can envision the
herently cartographic.27                pasts of Los Angeles, California,
      These observations lead to        U.S.A. The topography of a region
a re-conception of historical in-       is the topology of the emplaced,
terpretation as the act of reading      place-making people, carving
places. History has always seemed       their own nodes of power and
so obviously to operate in the field    freedom within the grand institu-
of time and temporality, that its es-   tional landscape that they inhabit.
sential spatiality has long been ob-    Because many prior generations
scured, especially in the era of mo-    erected these coral-like struc-
dernity, which valorized the pro-       tures of institutions (of labor, of
cesses of time over the habitations     discourse, of cultural, residential,
of space. Since the spatial turn, we    racial, ethnic, gender, labor, and
are now able to see how process-        wealth segregation), all new stories
es also and inescapably inhabit         to tell are built upon older stories.
and inscribe. Once we recognize         I tell these stories with a combi-
the spatiality of the past, its form    nation of verbal textual narratives
becomes a matter of inescapable         and cartographic depictions.
interest. Pictorial representations     Cartography as a pictorial form
of social forms can be thought of       operates by simultaneity and juxta-
as the mapping of the footprints of     position; verbal text is syntactically
past actions. Past actors inscribed     linear and narratological. As such,
and left the scene. Their inscribed     each form of communication can
actions haunt every subsequent          do something that the other can-
inhabitant as ghosts, shaping lives     not. Together, we can say far more
invisibly. The historian who maps       than we can with either alone.
the past makes these ghosts visible.            Ghost maps are hand-crafted

69
W
1




Map Call-Out 2:                             Aerial photography, Fairchild Airphoto, 1945,
Ruins of Boylston St, 1940s-1990s.          courtesy of Whittier College. Watercolor
This montage depicts the north side of      and ink drawings by the Works Progress
Boylston at the top of the street seen in   Administration (WPA) and the Los Angeles
Ghost Neighborhoods, with the detritus of   Planning Department, 1940, Los Angeles City
former lives found by the author and his    Archives. Photography and montage, Phil
collaborator in the basement foundations.   Ethington, with Steve Appleton, 1997.


           70
WINDOWS




composites of archival analog car-       tual narratives and ghost maps, I
tography and vector-based, digital       compose photomontages, panora-
GIS layers. They are designed visu-      mas, and mosaics of photographic
ally to reveal time, change, events,     stills and other forms of graphic
and motion through the symbolic          depiction. These compositions
languages of color, shape, iconog-       are both denotative—showing
raphy, and textual annotation. They      factually the where and the when,
are dense, thick maps, not made to       and connotative—implying mean-
be read quickly, as would be mere        ingful relations among the visual
illustrations or diagrams. As a rich     components. As “call-outs” or
and complex graphical composition        “wormholes,” these photographic
drawn directly from the profound         compositions are also indexed to
complexity of past social life itself,   points and shapes in the ghost
the content of a ghost map—like          maps. Visualizations of complex
the metropolis itself—exceeds the        historical phenomena, as they took
capacity of any textual narrative        place, these compositions draw
to explain it. Each ghost map,           much of their representational
crafted in pictorial language, is a      power from the indexical nature of
free-standing document, offered for      photography—an empirical record
the reader to ponder and to puzzle       of the past.
over, to return to many times.                  The Ghost Map portrays the
       As the critical history of car-   central and most layered districts
tography has made clear, maps are        of the global metropolis of Los
as imaginary as they are objective.      Angeles—a very old work-in-prog-
When composed by the historian           ress, retaining the shapes of power
to recount the past, however, the        inscribed by many generations
geometric and the metaphoric             since the first human settlements
can be deliberately coordinated          of the late Pleistocene Era. Con-
to achieve that which the art of         quered by the Uto-Aztecans circa
historical narrative has always          0 CE, the settlement on the banks
sought: to move and persuade the         of the Los Angeles River where it
reader/viewer. Alongside my tex-         enters the Los Angeles Basin, was

71
W
1




conquered again by the Spanish           polygons from which those data
Empire in 1781 and re-established        were collected. Readers can fol-
as El Pueblo de Nuestra Señora           low a statistical narrative through
Reina de Los Angeles (The Town           stacked bars (racial composition,
of Our Lady Queen of the Angels).        denoted by colors arbitrarily as-
Centered on La Placita (the Little       signed) and pie charts (ratio of
Plaza), this settlement became the       blue to white collar workers), each
nucleus of the mighty Los An-            indexed to the census tracts over
geles metropolis. The toponyms           seven decades.
used here are those inscribed by               The freeways, construct-
each successive regime—each              ed in this Downtown area from
society who ruled this place. The        1948–1953, obliterated many res-
“base map” (bottom-most layer)           idential spaces and created new
is a 1925 US Geological Survey           transportation flows and new
(USGS), which (using early aerial        barriers to street-level circulation.
photography as source material)          The “Four-Level Interchange” [See
recorded the locations of every          Call-Out 1: “Figueroa Specters”]
built structure. Contour lines visu-     created a new meta-intersection
alize the landforms.                     next to the arterial intersection of
      All social interactions take       Sunset Blvd. and Figueroa Blvd.
place, leaving institutional depos-      Edward Doheny’s “City Field”
its. But all societies and individuals   [See Call-Outs 2 and 3: “Ruins of
are constantly in motion. The cen-       Boylston St. and “Ghost Neigh-
sus data series on this Ghost Map        borhood”] brought petroleum to
tracks the changing racial-ethnic        the surface just west of downtown,
and social class composition of the      later overbuilt with residential
neighborhoods from 1940–2000.            neighborhoods, which in turn were
As a work of both interpretive hu-       razed for urban renewal, and then
manities and geographic social sci-      for a high school.
ence, the Ghost Map is accompa-                The houseless inhabitants
nied by an elaborate set of legends,     recorded in Figueroa Specters cre-
indexing known data to the precise       ated their community beneath the

         72
WINDOWS




mighty Four-Level Interchange,                    and raised in one of the homes
the first high-speed concrete                     within sight of his open-air bed
freeway in the world, finished in                 where he slept circa 1997, when
1953. Constructed by a Cold War                   his photograph was taken. The
developmental regime that tram-                   Ghost Map traces these paths of
pled democratic rights and razed                  destruction with the transparent,
the homes and neighborhoods of                    ghostlike freeways, the homes of
thousands of Angelenos, this mas-                 Guajardo and his neighbors, visible
sive structure inscribes new forms                underneath. Ghost maps preserve
of injustice into the metropolis.                 the visibility of older, prior shapes
Joseph Guajardo (far right, mid-                  beneath those that have taken their
dle row, Figueroa Specters), one                  place in later times.
of these houseless men, was born                  Phil Ethington




Map Call-Out 3: Ghost Neighborhood,               seal the school from poisonous gases that a
Beaudry and Court Streets, 1940, 1997.            competent school board would have known
These open fields just west of Downtown           about before attempting construction there.
were once vibrant neighborhoods, razed in         Sited atop the former oil field of petroleum
the 1980s to make way for a development           magnate Edward Doheny, methane gas
that never materialized. In the late 1990s, the   rises to the surface, haunting students while
remaining foundations and other remnants          they train for a better future. Watercolor
of former homes were graded away to make          and ink drawings by the Works Progress
way for a Los Angeles Unified School District     Administration (WPA) and the Los Angeles
mega-project, an ill-planned, $300 million        Planning Department, 1940. Photography
high school, millions of which were spent to      and montage, Phil Ethington, 1997.


73
W
2


PDub Productions:
Mapping HiFi
Clutching his electric guitar, eyes   bution on multiple platforms. “An-
closed, Angelo “Manok” Bernardo       them” cuts between Manok’s story
mimics the Jimi Hendrix post-         and his efforts to bring Filipino
er behind him. The soundtrack         Christmas caroling into Los Ange-
is Hendrix’s version of the “Star     les’ Historic Filipinotown, aka HiFi.
Spangled Banner,” only it’s Manok,    As “Anthem” closes, Manok plays
a recent Filipino immigrant,          a Hendrix-style version of
playing the song. “Manok” stands      the Philippines’ national anthem,
for chicken, he explains. As a        “Lupang Hinirang.”
young boy he had a fighting roost-          “Anthem” is Manok’s per-
er and started drawing chickens.      sonal story; yet it’s the neighbor-
The name stuck. These scenes          hood’s story, too. Both are full of
open “Anthem,” Manok’s                contradictions, hybridities, and
video from PDub Productions,          conundrums. Designated as such
an innovative media and civic en-     in 2002, Historic Filipinotown has
gagement program in which local       few cultural or physical markers to
youth create digital content about    indicate the area’s status. It is bet-
Historic Filipinotown for distri-     ter known for its proximity to the




         74
WINDOWS




http://www.hypercities.com/pdub




101 Freeway and as a shortcut to        culture, and the history.
downtown than as a cultural nexus.      The larger Filipino American
Although only 2.1 square miles,         community is much like
the significance of HiFi extends far    HiFi in that we are not very
beyond its borders. Today, HiFi is      visible. We are spread out
ethnically and culturally diverse,      all over L.A. Due to our
with Filipinos comprising 20% of        great ability to adapt, we
the population and Latinos the          tend to blend in. Because we
majority.                               are not visible, many are
                                        surprised to learn that
      Historic Filipinotown is          Filipinos are the largest Asian
      different from other              population in the city
      Los Angeles ethnic “towns.”       of Los Angeles.
      HiFi just looks like Anywhere,
      Los Angeles. The richness of      Aquilina Soriano-Versoza, Executive 		
      the neighborhood is not so        Director, Pilipino Workers’ Center
      much in the visible structures,
      but more in the people,




75
W
2




Enter PDub Productions,                       As such, PDub addressed
aka PDub.                              several community needs: it built a
PDub was designed to deepen            sustainable digital media program
a sense of place—not simply to         for resource-poor neighborhood
describe, document, and depict         youth; it engaged local youth in
that place. By engaging genera-        creating content about Historic
tions of community members in          Filipinotown’s character, histo-
the process of representing HiFi       ry, and significance; it convened
through its own stories, it aimed to   an inclusive, multi-generational,
help shape HiFi’s future. It intro-    cross-sector coalition of neigh-
duced young immigrants, new to         borhood stakeholders; and it
the neighborhood but also to the       enhanced the neighborhood’s vis-
country, to HiFi. It taught them       ibility and foot-traffic. PDub uses
the digital media skills they didn’t   digital technology in a creative,
learn in school. It deepened their     educational, and participatory
interest and investment in their       manner to advance ongoing efforts
new community by directly intro-       to benefit the community-at-large.
ducing them to people who work         Its programs appear on multiple
in, on, and influence the commu-       platforms and in many forms: as
nity, while giving PDub’s youth        interactive Mobile HiFi Tours, on
authority as HiFi’s media makers.      mapping platforms such as Hyper-




         76
WINDOWS




Cities, as street-level multimedia   enterprise consisting of artists,
installations, and even on metro     media professionals, and educa-
buses. The goal is to create a new   tors, developed the partnerships,
type of cultural landmark—one        drove PDub’s focus, designed the
that is participatory, iterative,    curriculum, led after-school work-
reflective of the community, and     shops, and did post-production
malleable in format.                 of all media-based work. PDub
                                     was HyperCities’ most in-depth
Partners                             exploration of a community in Los
PDub was designed to blur institu-   Angeles. In the HyperCities instan-
tional boundaries and disciplines,   tiation of the project, content was
pairing small organizations with     created by community members—
giant ones. The Pilipino Workers’    particularly youth—and exists
Center (PWC) was the commu-          side-by-side with content created
nity anchor and hub. PDub grew       by scholars, cartographers, and the
out of PWC’s desire to create a      government census bureau. The
program for Filipino immigrant       project was generously supported
youth and give them access and       by the MacArthur Foundation/
entry both to the community and      HASTAC, through one of its first
to media-based skills. Public Mat-   “digital media and learning” prizes
ters, an interdisciplinary, social   in 2008. Finally, UCLA’s Center for




77
W
2




Research in Engineering, Media         tasks all of them—were not 		
+ Performance (REMAP) further          tasks I could expect in school.
expanded PDub’s media reach to         PDub demanded confidence, 		
the general public by assisting stu-   vision, and collaborative
dents in designing the framework       effort. I gained confidence 		
for a time-travelling Mobile HiFi      through the trust I was given 		
Tour, writing the tour’s code, and     in my ideas and guidance by
helping to create PDub’s largest       teachers (more like men-
piece of mobile media.                 tors) who nurtured my want-
                                       ing to challenge mainstream
     PDub shaped me as a               aesthetic sensibilities. PDub
     person and as an artist.          put faith in our collective
     Projects were predomi-            ability to create thoughtful
     nantly youth-led, from            art via filmmaking. PDub
     conception to completion.         was my introduction to that
     PDub projects, such as            art form, and it instilled an
     re-imagining and recreating       interest I am currently
     a harana in English,              developing and nurturing
     composing original music,         into a career. I stand endlessly
     developing and shooting           grateful.
     a music video—daunting 		         Xochilt Sanchez, PDub Student




         78
WINDOWS




PDub and power                          and UCLA students and faculty
PDub’s partnerships flipped many        through a seminar called “Creating
pre-existing power structures,          and Recreating Historic Filipi-
whether institutional, education-       notown,” taught by UCLA history
al, or age-related. PDub youth          professor Jan Reiff. As a collabora-
were primarily recent Filipino          tion between UCLA students and
immigrants and local Latino high        PDub high school students, the
school students. Of the students        PDub youth were thrust into the
who typically go to college in the      position of teachers, becoming the
neighborhood, most attend voca-         local informants and experiential
tional school or community col-         archive. The team’s community
lege. Many enter the work force as      mapping projects are “published”
caregivers or enlist in the military.   on the HyperCities platform and
In PDub, however, they drove the        provide complex, intersecting
intellectual content and scope of       insights into the layered and all-
the project. They were behind and       too-often erased histories of the
in front of the camera. They be-        neighborhood.
came the community experts and
educators. They worked directly
with artists, community members,        http://hypercities.com/LA




79
W
2




Taking mobile media                           tangible pathways to expe-		
in new directions                             rience the Filipino community
In order to reach a broader au-               and HiFi. The jeepney rep-		
dience, we pushed the notion of               resents Filipinos: it’s bright, it’s
mobile media both in concept and              colorful, and it’s unmistakable.
in scale. We did performances. We             With the Mobile HiFi Tours 		
held indoor and outdoor screen-               you can literally drive through
ings. We created GPS-enabled                  and delve into the richness 		
walking tours and large-scale tran-           that’s here.
sit tours. As a result, PDub’s audi-          Aquilina Soriano-Versoza
ence grew to include community           				
activists, L.A. history buffs, elected   The Mobile HiFi Immigrants’ Guide
representatives, business owners,        brought people to HiFi. Rather
and immigrants riding the bus.           than a conventional guide focused
                                         on key dates or sites, the stories
     PDub Productions, PWC’s             and perspectives of generations of
     Jeepney, and the Mobile HiFi        newcomers to Los Angeles shaped
     Tours all have the goal of          the user experience of place. Like
     raising the visibility of the       HyperCities, the Guides were
     Filipino American Communi-		        portable, time-travelling devices
     ty. The tours have created 		       that took people through space




         80
WINDOWS




and time. The Guides were divided        Guide. Cruising through HiFi in
into four time periods that started      the iconic orange PWC Jeepney as
in the 1880s (when Filipinos first       crowds cheer is an unforgettable
came to Los Angeles) and ended in        experience in creating and learning
the present. Each period featured a      about community memories. And
central figure, told in a first-person   thanks to L.A. Freewaves’ “Out The
narrative created by community           Window” program, Pdub went mo-
members, and a clickable peri-           bile on the Metro buses, too, reach-
od-specific map.                         ing an audience of millions weekly.
      PDub’s mobile media literally      Many bus riders are working class
grew larger and larger. Jeep Willys      immigrants. PDub featured student
were among many things the U.S.          stories of immigration and a series
Army left in the Philippines after       entitled “Hidden HiFi.”
WWII. Filipinos transformed them
into flamboyant forms of public          PDub and digital mapping
transportation. PWC acquired an          PDub was a dynamic interactive
original 1944 Sarao jeepney, tricked     program and process. But what
it out with a GPS unit, a flat screen    does it have to do with mapping?
monitor with digital maps, a mi-         Everything. We created physical
crophone and sound system, and a         mappings, inspired by the power
special version of the Mobile HiFi       of place, and digital mappings that




81
W
2




can be endlessly combined and            qualitative ( “humanistic”) stories.
recombined to explore stories of         They form new discursive registers
displacement and emplacement,            through their interactions and
location and relocation. They all        gain historical depth and com-
bear witness to social, political, and   plexity when further situated on
economic geographies of power            historical maps, such as the 1939
through the dynamics of push and         “redlining” map of Los Angeles.
pull that shape neighborhoods and        The “redlining” of what would later
communities. In HyperCities, the         become HiFi includes a descrip-
video histories created by PDub          tion file from the Home Owners'
youth exist side-by-side with five       Loan Corporation that claims that
decades of census and demograph-         the neighborhood is shifting to
ic data (such as median income           “subversive racial elements.” It is
levels, home values, ethnicity, and      precisely through “thick mapping”
education levels), rendered as GIS       that such frictions become part of
maps in order to let quantitative        the consciousness of the present
( “social science”) data speak to,       and a motivation for on-going ed-
interact with, and be enhanced by        ucation and civic engagement.




         82
WINDOWS




     The process of raising the              Filipino workers helped to
     visibility of Filipino culture          build a sense of dignity and
     and the Filipino American               pride in Filipino caregivers 		
     community also helps to                 who formerly were ashamed 		
     reconnect and deepen the un-            of their positions. It gave them
     derstanding of Filipinos                confidence to educate legisla-		
     themselves. Filipino immi-              tors about the need for equal
     grants often do not know                rights and protections for do-
     about the important struggles           mestic workers. And it helped
     and victories of the Filipino           educate a generation of youth
     farmworkers. American-                  with the skills and knowledge
     born Filipinos were never                for understanding, mapping, 		
     taught in school about the              and finally transforming the
     Golden Age of Filipino Amer-            city they live in.
     ican Boxing and have felt               Aquilina Soriano-Versoza
     a sense of always being an
     “other” whose face and culture    Mike Blockstein and Reanne Estrada,
     are rarely reflected in the 		    Public Matters
     mainstream telling of Ameri-		
     ca. The visibility through 		
     PDub has helped the Pilipino 		
     Workers’ Center to start con-
     struction on a new building
     with 45 units of affordable
     housing. The stories of the




83
The View from
Above / Below
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––




Toward a Media Archaeology
of Google Earth
  Viewing the world in Google Earth
(TP)



has naturalized a set of habits (flying,
panning, zooming) linked to a long-
standing desire to rise above the earth
and look down from the perspective
of the Heavens. This desire can be traced back to Greek and
Roman mythology when the figure of Apollo’s detached,
omniscient eye first took hold as a cipher for flying above
and seeing the earth.28 The fantasy of external spectatorship
of the earth is deeply wed to the history of empire, the rise of
the nation-state, and the colonial will to know, domesticate,
and control space. It can be traced from the mythologies
of antiquity and the cosmographies of early Christianity
to Renaissance and early modern cartographic visions of
the whole earth and, later, rationalized notions of a fully
enlightened earth taken to their logical conclusion with the
modern desire to accurately map and know every point on
the planet. Transcending time and space, Cicero’s dream
of Scipio ends with his liberation from the planet as he
surveys the universe and gazes back at a small planet earth.
Centuries later, Immanuel Kant, conceives of the sublime—
das Erhabene—as unbounded elevation, of a mental state of
soaring above the ground, liberated from the clunky facticity
of the human body. Today, military satellites encircling the
earth survey movement on the ground down to centimeters,
while social media applications running on GPS-enabled
mobile devices transmit and share the geographic and
temporal coordinates of a user’s every move.
      But it was not until 1968 that the earth was actually
seen (not imagined or pictured) as a whole by human eyes
with Apollo 8’s escape from the earth’s orbit and its subse-
quent lunar encounter. This was the first time that human
beings saw the earth from the depths of space. The famous
“Earthrise” photograph taken in December of 1968 docu-
ments this spectatorial encounter, showing the earth partially
enveloped in darkness next to the lunar landscape. Although
often re-oriented and widely circulated to depict the lunar
landscape along the bottom, the original Earthrise photo-          (8)




85
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



graph is quite unsettling since it radically disrupts the at-
tempt to re-ground human perception.29 (Fig. 9) If you zoom
all the way out of Google Earth, you see a diminutive image
of the earth—perhaps not coincidentally—from almost the
same perspective and distance as this photograph, but while
sitting firmly and safely ensconced in front of your computer
screen. (Fig. 10) In 1972, during the last lunar mission, another
photograph of the earth was taken, this one simply called
NASA Photo AS17-22727, which depicted a geometrically
framed planet earth inscribed in a black square. (Fig. 8). The
photograph follows the Tropic of Capricorn and foregrounds
Africa and the Antarctica (Cosgrove, 261), while other such
photographs variously “re-center” the earth with the North
Atlantic on top. Whereas the Earthrise photograph seems to
betray a somewhat modest point of view by capturing the
receding earth in its smallness, contingency, and distance, the
1972 photograph seems to declare itself as triumphal: a per-
fectly geometrical, completely rationalized image of control
and even imperial hubris. This is the realization of Heideg-
ger’s fear of the “the world conceived and grasped as a pic-
ture”: the earth is merely an image of an astronomical mass,
conquered, rationalized, and presented by the human sub-
ject.30 As a whole earth viewer, Google Earth oscillates be-
tween the world-views and ideologies of these two images.
       Google Earth valorizes external spectatorship on the
totality of the earth, the pleasures of flying, and the instanta-
neity of seamless, hassle-free travel without leaving the safety
of a home computer. But it is also a media form which has to
be understood as a spatial-cultural practice that has a long
history in the West connected to knowing, organizing, seeing,
and controlling the world, on the one hand, and unknowing,
disorganizing, obscuring, and subverting the world, on the
other. While it is tempting (and even quite plausible) to see




86
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



                                                                   (9)




Google Earth as the culmination of the totalizing, transcen-
dental gaze, it is also a wildly participatory platform for de-
centering this gaze, for playful uprootings and particularist
story-telling, something that we have spent a lot of time ex-
ploring with the HyperCities project. In other words, Google
Earth is Apollonian and Dionysian at the same time.
      To begin to unpack this cultural form, we might consid-
er Google Earth from the standpoint of media archaeology,
namely the media-specific, discursive practices and topoi, es-
pecially visual ones, which form the conditions of possibility
for representing and seeing the earth like this.31 How did see-
ing and flying in Google Earth become a culturally redundant
and even naturalized habit of viewing and navigation? When
did it make sense epistemologically? In other words, what had
to happen for me to believe this perceptual experience as a
natural, correct, and true experience of viewing and navigat-
ing the earth? What does it mean, after all, that “the earth” is
imagined and manipulated as a whole? Here, we are not just




87
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



interested in Google Earth as a technology but want to em-
phasize how it is a spatial-cultural practice with a significant
pre-history related to a multiplicity of media and cartographic
forms for viewing and representing the totality of the planet
earth. Crystallized by the Apollonian desire to see as a tran-
scendental spectator, Google Earth is the product of many
different perceptual habits and histories of visuality, including:

•      The desire to travel to faraway places without leaving
       home, something that is emblematically embodied in
       the history of the nineteenth century panorama, and
       lives on today with the treatment of reality like a spec-
       tacle for the safe and privileged viewing of the West,
       something that, in Susan Sontag’s critical words, “uni-
       versalizes the viewing habits of a small, educated popu-
       lation living in the rich part of the world.”32
•      The military history of Global Positioning Satellites, re-
       mote sensing and remote seeing, the history of aerial
       reconnaissance, and the bombardment of cities
       throughout the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.
•      The history of media as forms of navigation, stretching
       from the first reconnaissance photographs taken from
       balloons and airplanes to city films in the late 1920s,
       flight simulators and contemporary videogame interfac-
       es structured as navigation through virtual spaces.
•      The cartographic fantasy of the completely surveyed and
       mapped earth, which found its early forms in sixteenth
       century world atlases that sought to condense knowledge
       of the physical surface of the earth into a flat representa-
       tion, and which gradually closed the distance between
       the representation and the referent (a fantasy that Borges
       takes to its logical conclusion in his famous story of a
       map the same size and quality of the land it represents ).33




88
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



                                                                  (10)




•    The expansion of capital into previously unknown, un-
     invented, or untapped realms (“the digital”), while si-
     multaneously naturalizing itself and eliding its differen-
     tial histories, inequities, and injustices.
•    The Situationist aesthetic of détournement, of taking
     and cutting up maps, of overlaying them as montages in
     unsystematic ways and creating new forms of naviga-
     tion, story-telling, and memory-making.
•    An ethic of curation and responsibility to otherness, to
     people and places that have not, historically, been “on
     the map,” and which gives rise to infinitely extensible
     digital spaces of participation.

As media theorist Lev Manovich argues, the cultural form of
navigation is at the heart of almost every iteration of “new
media” and can be traced throughout the twentieth century:
it stretches from the first reconnaissance photographs taken
from airplanes during wartime in the early 1900s to Vertov




89
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



and Ruttmann’s city films in the late 1920s, to the develop-
ment of immersive flight simulators during the Cold War, to
the creation of computer-generated animations and simula-
tions in the 1970s, to contemporary videogame interfaces
structured as navigation through virtual spaces as well as the
embodied experiences of virtual navigation created by new
media artists such as Jeffrey Shaw and Bill Viola.34 Among
many other places, we see this media form of navigation ex-
emplified in Microsoft’s wildly successful Combat Flight Sim-
ulator series, the various city instantiations of Grand Theft
Auto, or the infinitely expansive virtual worlds of Second
Life. The history of new media is wed to the history of the
navigable space interface, the ways in which a spectator visu-
alizes and experiences movement through space.
      The navigable space interfaces created in the late-1990s
and early-2000s by the ART+COM group for projects such as
“The Invisible Shape of Things Past” can be regarded as one of
the epistemological and media-specific antecedents to Google
Earth and HyperCities.35 ART+COM explored the fundamen-
tal concepts of panning, zooming, and overlaying (now so
culturally redundant as to seem naturalized) through pan-
oramic camera movements, still images, layered historical
maps, and time-based media. Focused on Berlin after the fall
of the Wall, ART+COM aimed to create a virtual city as a
kind of archive of perceptual habits and media forms, which
could be accessed over the web and eventually integrated with
the physical landscape. The idea was not to replicate or extend
the hyper-realism of contemporary computer graphics but
rather to interrogate the media forms themselves through in-
terfaces that probed both the temporal and spatial layers of
the city and the perceptual habits of film and digital media.
      But to understand the media-technology roots of mov-
ing through space without leaving home—a kind of virtual




90
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



tourism—we need to turn back to the history of the panora-
ma, a much longer technological and conceptual cultural
form for panoptic viewing. The word “panorama,” coined at
the end of the eighteenth century, means “all-viewing” and
was variously instantiated throughout the nineteenth century
in large-scale, survey landscape paintings and photographs,
installed on round or circular surfaces in buildings specifi-
cally designed for panoptic vision. The basic aim of the pan-
orama, as Stephen Oettermann argues in his comprehensive
history of the mass medium, was “to reproduce the real world
so skillfully that spectators could believe what they were see-
ing was genuine.”36 Unlike traditional canvasses, these paint-
ings completely surround and envelop viewers in an environ-
ment that functions as a portal or gateway to a faraway reality,
be it scenes from historical battles, overseas places, or the to-
tality of the metropolis. Housed in major European metropo-
lises like London, Paris, Berlin, and Vienna, the panorama was
a decidedly western perceptual mode of viewing the local as
well as the foreign, in which the power of sight was deeply
wed to the imperial conquest of real and imagined spaces.
Most panoramas functioned by suturing the view of specta-
tors to what was to be seen in such a way that the depiction of
a panoramic reality passed in front of their eyes, such as with
the numerous Kaiser Panoramas throughout Germany, which
were functional for nearly a century. (Fig. 11)
       However, the Great Globe in London’s Leicester Square
between 1851 and 1862 turned that mode of vision inside out:
it allowed viewers to enter into the globe itself and see the
continents and oceans painted in relief on the entire interior
surface of the sphere, at a scale of 10 miles to one inch. (Fig. 12)
Accessed through four viewing platforms, this immersive ex-
perience of viewing the whole earth from the inside out in-
verted the position of the transcendental spectator zooming




91
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



(11)




       into the earth from above and, instead, placed this spectator at
       the center of a viewing experience from within (analogous to
       the “galaxy view” in Google Earth, when you look outward
       rather than down). In both cases, viewers are placed within
       an expansive scopic regime in which they are constituted as
       subjects of knowledge by virtue of a panoptic gaze.
             In 2005, Google and Microsoft launched their own digi-
       tal globes, Google Earth and Microsoft Virtual Earth, respec-
       tively. Using comprehensive imagery obtained over years by a
       host of US satellites, viewers running these applications can
       zoom into virtually any location on earth and look down,
       with often extraordinary levels of resolution, on the surface
       structures of the earth. With a broadband internet connec-
       tion, anyone can transmogrify their spectatorship into the
       Apollonian eye, a synoptic and transcendental view that is
       unencumbered by the facticities of physical embodiment:
       one’s locality—seemingly—ceases to matter; political, eco-
       nomic, or social circumstances—seemingly—no longer con-
       dition spectatorship once the connection is established; and




       92
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



                                                                     (12)




 Fig. 5




one’s body is never put at risk. As Jonathan Crary has argued,
this detachment of spectatorship from the body is actually
the hallmark of a host of visualization technologies, which
“[relocate] vision to a plane severed from a human observer
… Most of the historically important functions of the human
eye are being supplanted by practices in which visual images
no longer have any reference to the position of the observer
in a ‘real,’ optically perceived world.”37 Severed from the hu-
man body, seeing and traveling in Google Earth is a safe and
pleasurable experience in which movement is frictionless,
borders are non-existent, and mobility is just about limitless.
It is no coincidence that this experience of seeing brings
about reverie, a kind of sublime feeling in which one is ele-
vated above the earth in a dream-like state.38
       Although the application is certainly much more than
the imagery itself, it is all-too-often forgotten where the satel-
lite photographs came from and what purposes Global Posi-
tioning Systems (GPS) and Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) originally served. As Caren Kaplan has argued in her




93
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



cultural history of “aerial targeting,” the ways in which GPS
and GIS produce militarized consumer and citizen subjects
through discourses of precision often ignore, if not obscure,
the military infrastructure that enabled these kind of subjec-
tivities in the first place.39 Kaplan and other critics such as
Lisa Parks are rightly concerned about the intimacy between
the “whole world ethos” of the 1960s and 70s, its imbrication
with the history of the Cold War, and the televisual capacities
enabled by GPS satellites, which “disembody vision and con-
struct seemingly omniscient and objective structures of see-
ing and knowing the world . . . [that posit] the world (or the
cosmos) as the rightful domain of Western vision, knowl-
edge, and control.”40 The viewing technologies and satellite
imagery of Google Earth have to be recognized as the prod-
uct of warfare, particularly the Cold War and the modes of
seeing made possible by remote sensing and global surveil-
lance, aerial war, precision guided missile systems, and com-
bat flight simulators. Indeed, Google’s satellite imagery comes
primarily from DigitalGlobe and GeoEye, two companies
that own high-resolution, earth-observation satellites, and
sell their imagery to customers, including the U.S. govern-
ment, the military, and private industry, for purposes of intel-
ligence, monitoring, defense, and situational awareness.41
       It is hardly coincidental that early versions of Google
Earth came with a pre-installed flight simulator for navigat-
ing its logistical space. Google Earth is simply the next gener-
ation of hyper-realistic flight simulators, a basic form of in-
teractive media that uses three-dimensional graphics to navi-
gate through virtual spaces that are closely modeled after the
physical world. In his cultural history of Microsoft’s Combat
Flight Simulator 2, Patrick Crogan argues that military flight
simulation has informed—structurally and technically—the
development of computer-aided design, animation, and mul-




94
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



timedia computer games: “The flight simulator game genre
… is the direct descendent of computerized flight simulation
developments that have been so crucial in the history of
computer-generated imaging and simulation.”42 In its preva-
lence in mainstream culture through film, television, video
games, and web applications like Google Earth, the flight
simulator, as Manovich points out, has naturalized a way of
seeing in which the street-walking flâneur is transformed
into a combat pilot, often obscuring or forgetting “the mili-
tary origins of the navigable space form.”43
      While Google Earth seems to offer a totalizing, immedi-
ately accessible view of the completely illuminated earth, this
totality and immediacy is quite misleading, as the imagery is
not a single snapshot of the earth but rather a complex, ever
changing montage, created and re-created over years, of re-
gions of the earth bathed in sunlight.44 In the early history of
cartography, there are significant forerunners to this kind of
representation of the whole earth through compilations of
geographic knowledge, most emblematically the amalgamat-
ed atlases produced and printed by Gerardus Mercator and
Abraham Ortelius in the sixteenth century. Mercator’s world
map of 1569, Nova et Aucta Orbis Terrae Descriptio ad Usum
Navigantium Emendate Accommodata, for example, was a
montage of many information sources, including explorer
reports, travel narratives, eyewitness accounts, and imagina-
tive speculations, ranging from those of Strabo and Pliny to
Marco Polo and Magellan. The map itself was produced in 18
sheets from copper engravings and included many of the
sources as documentation on the map itself, with “unknown”
areas in North America, the polar regions, and the southern
hemisphere variously fictionalized and sometimes occupied
by sea monsters, cannibals, and strange beasts.45 Ortelius’s
1570 world atlas, Theatrum Orbis Terrarum, arguably the first




95
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       modern atlas, was also an amalgamation (or perhaps, a sum-
       mation) of a diversity of information sources, cartographic
       representations (including his original 1564 atlas, Typus Or-
       bis Terrarum), and sources that depicted the known and un-
       known world. Predating Google Earth by four and half cen-
       turies, both maps present the earth as a gridded whole, the
       product of European colonial encounters in which knowl-
       edge and sovereign power have become ever more deeply
       wed to produce a depiction of the earth as a whole to be sur-
       veyed, known, and controlled.
             In the realm of digital mapping of the whole earth, the
       forerunner of Google Earth is the Van Sant map, the most
       widely reproduced digital image of the whole earth ostensi-

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
       Where is (0,0)? Deep in the Ocean of Geo-data


       ( DS)

       coords = this._getTagValue(xml, namespacePrefix +
       “coordinates”);
       …
       path = coords.split(“ “);
       len = path.length;
       // If marker has only one coordinate pair, it’s a path
       if ( len === 1 || path[1] === “”) {
           // Make sure we have Point Tag
           if ( xml.getElementsByTagName(namespacePrefix + 		
                “Point”).length > 0 ) {

               bits = path[0].split(“,”);
               this._points[0] = new
                    GLatLng(parseFloat(bits[1]), parseFloat(bits[0]);
               this._type = this.MARKER;
           }
       } else if ( len > 1 ) {
           // Build the list of points




       96
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



bly depicting an unmediated, totalized view of the planet
from outer space. Distributed in the 1990s by the National
Geographic Society as a poster called “A Clear Day,” the mon-
tage is an engineering composite consisting of thirty-five
million scanned pixels of the surface of the earth taken be-
tween 1986 and 1989 by National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration satellites. One can see a strikingly similar im-
age upon zooming all the way out of Google Maps: it is a pix-
ilated world without clouds, smog, night, weather patterns,
and people.46 Just like the Van Sant map, the earth never ex-
isted like this! Yet, the image presents itself as a true and clear
reflection of the earth as a whole, one that masks all friction,
social structures, and even its own conditions of possibility.47

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
      for (i=0; i<len; i++) {
        bits = path[i].split(“,”);

         point = new GLatLng(parseFloat(bits[1]),
parseFloat(bits[0]));

          this._points.push(point);
          this._bounds.extend(point);
      }

    // It’s a Polyline
    if ( xml.getElementsByTagName(namespacePrefix +
“LineString”).length > 0 ) {
      this._type = this.POLYLINE;
    }
         // It’s a Polygon
    if ( xml.getElementsByTagName(namespacePrefix +
“Polygon”).length > 0 ) {
      this._type = this.POLYGON;
    }
  }




97
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



             Unlike the overt constructedness of early modern atlases
       or modernist city novels and films (such as Alfred Döblin’s
       Berlin Alexanderplatz, in which pieces of narrative are literally
       gathered from the trash of the city and stitched together as if
       contiguous, or Walter Ruttmann’s city film, Berlin: Symphony
       of a Great City, in which the shock of the urban experience is
       betrayed by the cutting apart and splicing together of imagis-
       tic spaces of the metropolis), Google Earth seems to offer a
       mimetic, highly rationalized, and virtually frictionless map-
       ping of digital space onto physical reality. One wonders if
       Horkheimer and Adorno were right: does the fully enlight-
       ened/mapped earth radiate disaster triumphant?48


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

              ( DS) Where is nowhere? Where does an object go when

       mapping code can’t understand it? I’ll tell you where: Off
       the coast of Africa, where the equator and the Greenwich
       Meridian meet, in the Gulf of Guinea.
              Why does this happen? To understand, we need terms from
       that great computer scientist Stephen Colbert. Colbertian
       concepts of “truthiness” and “falsiness” are used to do
       mathematics on incompatible values. JavaScript—the language of
       web mapping—has a variety of data types, and allows a programmer
       to auto-convert between them, a process called “casting.” In
       places where a numerical variable must be true or false,
       JavaScript assumes that a zero means false, and a positive
       value means “true.” Truthiness is positive; falsiness is
       not. This is usually safe: an operation that returns a
       value of zero usually means “don’t do anything.”
              How many ways can something be falsy? There’s “undefined,”
       “null,” “false,” and “zero.” For numbers, there’s also
       “NaN” (“not a number”). For a symbol to be undefined,
       it must never have existed; otherwise, the least-existent



       98
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



      But rather than insisting on and unmasking its con-
structedness, Google Earth has facilitated the march toward a
fantastic realism, adding “reality” features that allow users to
overlay present-day weather patterns, real-time lighting (in-
cluding the rising and setting of the sun), shadows, three-di-
mensional buildings, terrain features, ocean views, 360-degree
street views in panoramic bubbles (Fig. 13), and even the ability
to see the stars and galaxies from the perspective of the earth
on a clear night.49 The physical limitation and usefulness of
Borges’s map growing so large as to finally cover the territory
represented is no longer the issue: with Google Earth, physical-
ity has been overcome by an infinite virtuality, as ever greater


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

it gets is “null.” After that, false and zero mean a value has
been defined; they are assumed to be equivalent, and null is
close enough. False == zero == null.
     So what happens if Google Maps fails to understand numbers
that represent a set of coordinates? All of its attempts to
parse them result in NaN, which is falsy, or more falsy than
truthy. Make NaN a number, and the closest number to NaN is
0. Therefore, your badly-formed numbers (misread your XML?)
become 0s to Google Maps. Your points end up in the middle of
the Atlantic Ocean, in the deep waters of geo-data, rippling
in the digital waves off the coast of Africa, or stranded on
“Null Island,” as the makers of Natural Earth, a company that
distributes public domain map datasets, calls it. Ultimately,
it’s the consequence of an epistemological order that was
codified globally in 1884 when Greenwich was selected as
the prime meridian, the point of origin for every longitude
measurement and clock in the world. And so it remains today: the
origin (0,0) is the site of the unrepresentable from which all
other points are nevertheless measured.



99
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



viewing capacities, functionalities, and datasets can be loaded
into the application. Where does it end? With a ubiquitous web
of information (the semantic web) merging, inextricably, with
the planet earth. This is the possibility—and perhaps also the
horror—of the geospatial web. It is the essence of what might
be considered Web 3.0, a Matrix-like fantasy of the all-perva-
sive web50 that promises not to be evil.51 As Paul Virilio pre-
sciently pointed out in his analysis of the logistics of percep-
tion in the twentieth century, the ultimate goal of the war ma-
chine (of which Google Earth is a comparatively benign prod-
uct) is to become “an all-seeing Divinity, … a general system of
illumination that will allow everything to be seen and known,
at every moment and in every place.”52 This can only happen
when the all-knowing information machine merges—in its
transparency, ubiquity, and instantaneity—with the all-seeing
war machine. One wonders how far away we are, or if we have
already arrived.
       And what, then, might we actually see lurking behind
these images of absolute totality? Far from a utopian picture of
global unity and harmony, the image of the whole earth re-
flects a body in pieces, a radically broken, fragmented, and in-
equitable reality marked by, among other things, radical dis-
parities of wealth, social injustices, political strife, environmen-
tal disasters, and technologies of violence and destruction. The
very representation of the earth from a distance—whether
through Google Earth, the lunar mission photographs, or six-
teenth century world atlases—gives rise to the dream of a uni-
fied totality, a global body that obscures the fundamental nex-
us of knowledge, representation, and power. For this reason, it
is all the more urgent to deconstruct these images of global
totality, to interrogate their conditions of possibility, to undo
their silences and erasures, and to decolonize their knowledge
systems. There is no unified, homogenous earth; there are only




100
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



                                                                    (13)




spatial practices of representation that function as historically
contingent ways of knowing, controlling, and possibly liberating.

      ( DS) To delve into these conditions of possibility, it

is worth looking at the technical and corporate history of
Google Earth a bit more. The original goal of both Google
Maps and Google Earth was to give users local insight into
the world around them, to transform digital navigation
into physical navigation of nearby streets, rather than to
provide a global perspective on the world. According to the
design teams of both products, the local perspective was
more marketable, and the global perspective was almost an
afterthought. This tension between local and global levels
persists in both tools.
      Google Earth began life at Intrinsic Graphics, in a
division spun off into Keyhole, Inc. as EarthViewer3D. Co-
founder Avi Bar-Zeev cited a desire to give users a whole-
earth perspective for educational and environmentalist




101
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       reasons, motivated in part by Al Gore’s Digital Earth
       initiative, which he considered as an inspiration for
       EarthViewer3D.53 That said, EarthViewer3D only provided
       high-resolution imagery for the relatively short list
       of major cities on Keyhole’s website.54 The program
       offered low-detail imagery for the majority of the
       world at a scale of one kilometer per pixel (at this
       scale, California, Nevada, Arizona, and Utah all fit
       in the same window). The company’s website promoted the
       tool to real estate companies, city governments, and a
       few federal and military customers, but given the level
       of imagery, it seems unlikely that EarthViewer3D would
       have allowed a user to see or accomplish much.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
       Projections

       ( DS)



       var MapApplication = function () {

         var _externalProjection = new OpenLayers.Projection(“EPSG:4326”),

               _internalProjection = new OpenLayers.Projection(“EPSG:900913”),

               _gsat = new OpenLayers.Layer.Google(“Google Satellite”, {

                type: google.maps.MapTypeId.SATELLITE

               }),

               _instance = new OpenLayers.Map(‘map’, {layers: [_gsat]});

               _instance.setCenter(new OpenLayers.LonLat(-0.11, 51.50)

               .transform(_externalProjection, _internalProjection));


       }();




       102
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



      The importance of the global view emerged later
in the development of Google Earth. The program’s
direct links to surveillance and national security
are questionable, but do drift together in the
public imagination. CEO John Hanke confirmed that his
intention was to link the company’s name to the Keyhole
spy satellites, part of the CIA’s Corona Program to
photograph the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic
of China between 1959 and 1972.55 While the company’s
website advertises homeland security applications, this
is only one of many markets it mentions. In fact, Hanke
attributed the company’s growing number of federal
customers in the early 2000s to the sobering post-9/11


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

These eleven lines of JavaScript (or similar ones) preface
any display of Google Maps imagery in OpenLayers. They are
an illusion of an illusion. They create the comfortable
bubble in which the Google Maps API automatically envelops
all of its projects, and it is the bubble HyperCities lives
in. Unless you step outside of the bubble into the wild
world of GIS standards, a Google Maps developer never has
to confront the ugly truth of cartographic projections,
including the one right under the thick layers of JavaScript
they use every day. A Google Maps developer drops data onto
a spherical globe, a perfect 360 degrees. The satellite
imagery that they are using, however, is a square, measured
in tens of thousands of meters. Google’s API converts
degrees to meters so transparently that developers never
notice that their sphere is a square; an OpenLayers
developer must face the square and convert it to a sphere
using the code above.




103
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       economy rather than Keyhole’s own specific marketing
       efforts. EarthViewer3D achieved public recognition
       when news programs used it to display imagery of
       bombings during the Second Gulf War, but the company
       specifically added high quality imagery from Baghdad
       and Tikrit rather than allowing news agencies to
       use imagery already available in EarthViewer3D. As a
       commercial product, the global perspective was generally
       unimportant, and its ability to give the user a global
       perspective for defense purposes was limited.
              Google Earth represented a significant change from
       EarthViewer3D: not only did Google Earth provide high-
       quality imagery for the entire world, it was free.
       Keyhole initially charged $599 for the program and
       required an annual subscription. This made Google Earth


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

              ( DS) To paraphrase William Gibson, a projection is

       a consensual hallucination, or a hundred: we agree on a
       fixed reference point and agree to measure all distances
       from that point. While setting a standard can seem cold—
       after all, there was no reason for Greenwich, England,
       to be the absolute longitudinal reference for dividing up
       the world—even cartographers and engineers can’t agree,
       and so projections proliferate. The common World Geodetic
       System 84 (WGS:84) standard is a lie: the world is an
       ellipsoid, not a sphere. Based on WGS:84, the Spherical
       Mercator projection (EPSG:4326, EPSG:90013, or SR-ORG:6)
       is an act of violence, chopping off the poles at 85
       degrees in either direction to make the world a perfect
       square. All are too big; a city cannot use a projection
       where the difference between one street and another may




       104
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



a widely accessible tool for exploration and a platform
for experimentation, as sites such as Google Earth
Hacks and Google Sightseeing demonstrate.56 It was not
businesses and federal clients who wanted to see the
entire world, but consumers who came to Google Earth
out of general curiosity (ironically enough, often to
see their home from the air). To both the engineers
and businesspeople behind EarthViewer3D, a global
perspective seems to have been a neat trick rather than
a serious tool.
      Globe demos are, in fact, a common test for
image-rendering hardware, but these are not commercial
products. Indeed, one such demo inspired Google Earth:
Mark Aubin, a Keyhole employee, attributed his vision of
the product to “From Space to Your Face,” a simulation


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

be less than a thousandth of a degree. And thus, the
cacophony of coordinate reference systems emerges as a
chaotic field of possibilities. Take your pick: would you
like Equal-area? Equidistant? And from which international
body will you take your name? The Eurocentric,
technocratic European Petroleum Standards Group? The
private-sector Environmental Research Systems Institute?
And would you prefer longitude, latitude or latitude,
longitude? Pick one and stick to it. Your data lives in
that world; but whatever world it lives in is just one of
many. Since reference points and units cannot be fixed,
no universal system can represent the world without
compromise. All attempts to transcend that world result
in creoles of coordinates and endless translation. Just as
there is no pure language, there is no true projection.




105
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



that he had created at Silicon Graphics International
several years earlier.57 “From Space to Your Face”
demonstrated the advanced graphics capabilities of
SGI’s Onyx workstation: it began with a global view
of the earth, and then zoomed down to the SGI logo on
a Nintendo 64. As the name suggests, it was graphics
engineers rendering the entire world out of more
Dionysian impulses than Apollonian ambitions.58
       Google made the choice to develop the global
perspective in Earth to extend an existing commercial
product into a platform for data exchange. Global
spectatorship, in turn, necessitates public openness:
businesses and governments care less about a global
view than a few important local perspectives, such as
San Francisco, London, and Baghdad. Digital tourists
are more acutely aware of gaps in coverage, and insist,
in turn, on global coverage. Consumers’ own demand
for a seamless global vision has paradoxically led to
exposing those seams.


Counter-Mapping
      ( TP) While Google Earth may have become the platform

for realizing the long-standing desire to be a transcendental
spectator looking down on the world, these same technolo-
gies have also helped to dislodge this spectator and repur-
pose the militaristic technologies in favor of something far
more participatory, particular, and open. Might it be possible,
then, to take geo-visualization platforms such as Google
Earth and Google Maps, which standardize and naturalize
certain spatial imaginaries, perspectives, and coordinate sys-
tems, and pry them apart, creating fissures that open up spac-
es for multiplicity, otherness, and alternative worlds? We have
struggled with this challenge throughout the life of the Hy-




106
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



perCities project. HyperCities is software built on a domi-
nant industry platform (Google Earth/Maps); it uses the sat-
ellite imagery licensed by Google; and marks-up data in a
format (KML) that places objects on standard projections:
Google Maps uses a variant of the Mercator projection, while
Google Earth uses the World Geodetic System 84. WGS:84 is
the reference system developed by the US Department of
Defense for the Global Positioning System. Is it true that the
master’s tools can never dismantle the master’s house, or is it
possible to de-stabilize the world-views, epistemologies, and
imagery comprising Google’s digital globe in order to foster
spaces of difference and particularity?
       Unlike the objectivist and decidedly imperialist goal of
accurately, comprehensively, and totally mapping every point
on earth, HyperCities begins with a question: how can this
platform be used to richly contextualize digital information,
preserve individual memories, and, perhaps most ambitious-
ly, begin to undo historical erasures and silences? Might the
very technologies themselves—indebted to militaristic tech-
nologies of surveillance and precision guided destruction—
be repurposed, as it were, for something life affirming? To do
so, Google Maps/Earth must not be thought of as the mirror
of nature, accurately reflecting the truth of the world “out
there,” but rather understood as a culturally and historically
specific spatial practice that not only has its own logic and
ideologies but also a particular place in the history of cartog-
raphy, coordinate systems, and the emergence of the geospa-
tial web.
      ( DS) Although they may have this effect, Google Maps

and Google Earth were not, strictly speaking, intended
to mirror nature; their construction reflects a series
of compromises made for business purposes and strategic
growth. Google Maps began as a geospatial search en-




107
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



gine, and, hence, one of its most common uses is to
find driving directions and business locations. Its use
of the Mercator projection attracts criticism, as evi-
denced by indignant posts on the Google Earth Product
forums such as: “Why does Google maps use the inaccu-
rate, ancient, and distorted Mercator Projection?” Re-
sponding, Google employee Joel Headley explained that
the Mercator projection best reflects the experience of
the human viewer on the ground, who sees the world as a
plane. Other projections, like Winkel Tripel, reflect
the relative sizes of land masses more accurately at a
global scale, but distort angles the further the user
zooms in, so intersections and streets appear skewed.
After careful consideration, including the release of a
version that used a different projection, the design
team settled on Mercator because they anticipated their
customers would be using the maps at high zoom levels
(i.e., “hyper-local”) more than at a global perspec-
tive. The team had to choose between distortion at the
global level and distortion at the local level, and the
former was chosen for business reasons.59
       ( TP) Unlike most mapping applications, HyperCities was

not designed to model urban environments, solve a technical
problem, or provide data for businesses or driving directions.
Instead, it was inspired by a humanities problem, namely
how to conceive of history spatially, or, more precisely, how
to give voice to historical erasures, preserve memories, and
tell stories that move through time and space. While the past
sometimes seeps out of the ground and buried memories
sometimes come to light, more often than not, cities are plac-
es of erasure and oblivion. HyperCities is fundamentally a
project of memory, one that was inspired as a response to
destruction, even the very kind of destruction made possible




108
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



by the technologies out of which it is built. In much the same
way that Walter Benjamin’s urban flâneur moves through a
city but is “conducted downward in time,” HyperCities users
move along, annotate, and disrupt the digital streets while
simultaneously peeling back and adding layers of “vanished
time” (AP, 419). With tens of thousands of stories, photo-
graphs, data points, narrative collections, maps, and models,
HyperCities enables the collaborative creation of “thick map-
pings” that are not only historical and commemorative but
also speculative, strategic, and political.
       The project does not presume to represent the fullness of
any urban space as it once was through historical re-
creation or mimetic modeling, nor does it seek to accurate-
ly reflect the reality of the city in digital space. Instead, Hyper-
Cities foregrounds critical, historical, and imaginative carto-
graphic representations of the city by enabling users to inter-
rogate, annotate, and remap the representations themselves. At
the same time that maps bear witness to certain epistemologi-
cal, social, and political configurations, they are also testaments
to their own silences, exclusions, and erasures. While the maps
in HyperCities have been georeferenced and placed within a
GIS-based system that displays objects in standard global pro-
jections, they are not static representations or accurate reflec-
tions of a past reality; instead, the historical maps function as
stacked representations in which one representation is keyed
to another representation—not to reality. Digital mapping
projects not only have the potential to destabilize and de-on-
tologize projections, coordinate systems, and representational
cartographies, but they also have the possibility of enabling
new modes of interactivity through memory maps, conscious-
ness raising, and forms of counter-mapping that create fissures,
alternatives, and sites of epistemological tension.




109
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



Georeferencing: “It is turtles all the way down”
      ( TP) The standard definition of georeferencing comes

from ESRI, the provider of the ArcMap software, which oper-
ates on the standard ArcGIS desktop, and is used for making
GIS maps and analyzing data:




          60




Another definition of georeferencing (at least for our pur-
poses) comes from the anthropologist Clifford Geertz:




                                                       61




On the face of it, the two definitions are incompatible: the
first strives to align a set of geographic data, such as a histori-
cal map, with a known coordinate system (“the basemap”).
The basemap is considered the referent, and the other map or
data is “matched up” to it. The process involves levels of com-
promise and distortion, from minor shifts to outright warp-
ing. In the end, the epistemology of the basemap triumphs.
The second definition is a story of infinite regress, in which
absolutes and origins are never found: it is turtles all the way
down. Applying this logic to georeferencing means that we
are referencing one turtle to another turtle, or one represen-




110
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



tation to another representation. Every representation, like
every coordinate system, is made up. It’s a way of represent-
ing a world that may or may not have any external referent.
Aligning one representation with another representation
does not yield a truth, but produces a relation, which allows a
series of questions to be asked and various kinds of analyses
to be undertaken. As long as the “basemap” is considered a
representation and not a reflection of reality, the two defini-
tions are perfectly compatible. But as soon as one representa-
tion (“the basemap”) takes priority as the normative episte-
mology and everything else is measured according to its de-
gree of deviation from this norm, we leave the world of tur-
tles and enter the violent world of objective truths.
      When we talk about georeferencing historical maps to-
day, we usually mean making older maps line up with Google
satellite imagery so that we can show them in Google Maps.
The earth in Google Maps is a square Mercator Mobius strip
developed through centuries of research into cartography
that culminated in the development of satellites, GIS, and
GPS. But this “basemap” is fundamentally a representation,
the product of certain spatial practices, epistemologies, and
compromises in seeing the world. The montage of satellite
images is a series of choices such as using the Mercator pro-
jection to privilege the local over the global; it cuts off the
globe at the eighty-fifth parallel in both directions and ren-
ders a rectangle rather than a sphere, given the limitations of
the browsers available when the product was released.
      If we look at earlier maps, we can understand the com-
promises that Google made and the ways in which prior
map-makers saw the world. This history is not a march to-
ward ever-more accurate maps but rather a series of contin-
gent choices that made sense at different times for different
purposes and, therefore, gave rise to varying world-views,




111
                HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



(14) Map
of Ōmi
province
georectified
using only
a few control
points.




                epistemologies, and modes of representing. We might ask:
                what if Google Maps was not our “basemap” or reference
                point? What if we consider past geospatial information sys-
                tems as perfectly “correct” ways of seeing and think of georef-
                erencing as a process of translating between different dis-
                courses, of attempting to key one representation to another
                representation, and that this process of alignment can utterly
                fail when epistemological incommensurabilities present
                themselves? To do so, we will give a few examples of “spatial
                deformance,” derived from the experimental interpretative




                112
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



                                                                  (15) Ōmi map
                                                                  georectified
                                                                  using sixteen
                                                                  control points
                                                                  and third-order
                                                                  polynomials.




and speculative process developed by Jerome McGann to an-
alyze texts in Radiant Textuality. While McGann focuses on
“poetic deformations” (such as reordering, isolating, altering,
and adding), we focus on “spatial deformations” of the episte-
mologies built into maps.62
     This map of Ōmi province in Japan is one of the pro-
vincial maps (kuniezu) commissioned by the fifth Shogun
Tsunayoshi in 1696–1702.63 (Fig. 14) These maps were based on
cadastral surveys to gain a better assessment of the land, the
people, local wealth, strategic points, and productivity imme-




113
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



diately after the shogunate seized control over the realm. The
map shows features of the natural environment, such as
mountains and rivers, as well as the built environment, such
as roads, villages, and egg-shaped ovals of varying size and
color. An “egg” connotes the yield of rice from each village
and thus signifies land value, not necessarily geographic
space. Villages in the same province are designated with a
uniform colored egg. The distance to major post stations and
cities is indicated along the edges of the map.
      The map is a geographic information system as much as
a work of political symbolism. Navigation is difficult with
this map because it is meant to be read from each of its four
sides and thus lacks a single point perspective. Features and
words on the map face different directions and even plotting
a simple path from northern Nara to southern Yoshino is
challenging. While Yoshino is located in the southern part of
the province, everything in the region of Yoshino on the map
(villages names, labels, images of mountains and waterfalls)
faces southward, forcing the viewer to turn the map about
180 degrees. Moreover, the map does not represent geo-
graphic space and distances in a uniform way.
      This map has been partially georectified to Google
Maps using a few control points to position it roughly at the
location it represents. We did this simply to display it in Hy-
perCities and show an approximation of the area it rep-
resents. But more systematic attempts to georectify it warp
the map into a smear. With sixteen control points, ArcMap
produces a spatial deformance. (Fig. 15)
      While the lake’s geography lines up, perhaps surprising-
ly, with Google Maps, the distances between villages do not,
let alone the “egg” sizes of each village. But this map of Ōmi
certainly does not have to be read or judged by its lack of
“alignment” with Google’s satellite imagery and coordinate




114
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



                                                                    (16)




system; rather, it offers a spatial epistemology, a frame of ref-
erence for seeing a world, which was useful and accurate as
far as the shogunate was concerned. If we take the map’s epis-
temology as normative, we can georectify the projection used
by Google Maps to yield another deformance. But because
Google does not allow their imagery or maps to be repro-
duced as warped or altered in any way, we used satellite im-
agery provided by ESRI, which uses the same providers as
Google (DigitalGlobe, GeoEye). (Fig. 16) This deformance was
created using the map of Ōmi with satellite imagery super-
imposed on top of it through a third order transformation.
Rather than georeferencing the Ōmi map to the satellite im-
agery, the satellite imagery was georeferenced to the Ōmi




115
                      HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



(17) Ortelius
map, loosely geo-
rectified to Google
satellite imagery
with four
control points.




(18)




                      116
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



                                                                     (19)




map. In order to maintain the shape of the lake, a total of
twenty control points were used, distributed along the lake
shore. Upon georectification, the imagery is stretched and
warped to bring the control points into alignment.
      More than a hundred years earlier, the Flemish cartogra-
pher Abraham Ortelius published a world map called Typus
Orbus Terrarum (1564). (Fig. 17) Using four control points, it
seems to roughly line up with Google Maps (despite the shapes
of North and South America and the absence of Australia). As
accurate as the shape of the European and African continents
seems to be at this global view, if we overlay a grid of the Eck-
ert IV spherical projection, subtler distortions emerge. The
overlaid shapes of the continents show where they should ap-
pear in the projection: the map’s scale is “wrong” in a number
of places. (Fig. 18) Ortelius’s map shifts all coordinates 30 de-
grees to the west (the distance from California to central Mis-
souri). Trying to make his map truly conform to Google Maps
leads to gross distortions.
      We can point to his lack of data about the Americas as a
shortcoming of his map, but what is more surprising is that
Ortelius literally has a different point of reference. But, again,
let us imagine the opposite: not a “deformance” of Ortelius’s




117
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



map but rather of the Mercator projection and satellite imag-
ery that Google uses. In other words, let’s georectify Google
using the Ortelius map as our base-map. When we do so, the
Americas are markedly distorted and the map pulls in to-
ward the bottom and flares out toward the top. Part of this
transformation is due to the fact that the Mercator projection
is rectangular (Google uses a variant of the Mercator without
the poles) and Ortelius’s map is spherical; it also shows how
much Ortelius overestimates the size of North America
(which, at the time, was, like South America, largely un-
known to him). But it also shows just how much Google’s
Mercator projection distorts: Google does not even try to
retain a shape near to the Earth’s actual shape, whereas Ortel-
ius actually made an effort to represent the ellipsoidal shape
of the globe on planar paper. When we try to re-project Goo-
gle Maps’ world to a different shape, it warps and the illusion
breaks. (Fig. 19)



Ideologies of Accuracy
      ( TP) As much as “thick mapping” is interested in denatu-

ralizing any geographic information system as a construction
of projections, coordinate systems, and representational
practices, georeferencing can also reveal ideologies at the lev-
el of spatial systems. This map was produced by the German
Democratic Republic (East Germany) in 1970 to show the
capital of Berlin. (Fig. 20) The map was published by the VEB
Landkartenverlag in East Berlin, a company that existed from
1954 to 1976, and was considered the most important carto-
graphic agency in East Germany. It was printed by the Mili-
tary Cartographic Service based in Halle, Germany. Maps
published in East Germany needed the approval of the Min-
istry of Culture and the Ministry of the Interior, both of




118
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW




                              (20)




119
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       which imposed tremendous censorship and regulation. The
       map is striking, first of all, for the obvious fact that “Berlin”
       barely includes West Berlin at all. With the exception of a
       couple of major (unmarked) roads, green spaces, and subway
       lines that pass through the West, West Berlin is an empty
       land. East Berlin, on the other hand, is fully annotated with

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
       Zero Hour: January 1, 1970




       ( DS)



       CREATE FUNCTION dateLarger (dateOneIsBC tinyint(1), dateOne
       datetime, dateTwoIsBC tinyint(1), dateTwo datetime)
       BEGIN
       DECLARE isLarger tinyint(1);
       DECLARE secondsOne int;
       DECLARE secondsTwo int;
       IF ((dateOneIsBC = 1) AND (dateTwoIsBC = 0)) THEN
         SET isLarger = 0;
       ELSEIF ((dateOneIsBC = 0) AND (dateTwoIsBC = 1)) THEN
         SET isLarger = 1;
       ELSEIF ((dateOneIsBC = 1) AND (dateTwoIsBC = 1)) THEN
         IF (YEAR(dateOne) < YEAR(dateTwo)) THEN
           SET isLarger = 1;
         ELSEIF (YEAR(dateOne) > YEAR(dateTwo)) THEN
           SET isLarger = 0;
         ELSEIF (DAYOFYEAR(dateOne) < DAYOFYEAR (dateTwo)) THEN
           SET isLarger = 0;
         ELSEIF (DAYOFYEAR(dateOne) > DAYOFYEAR(dateTwo)) THEN
           SET isLarger = 1;
         ELSE
           SET secondsOne = HOUR(dateOne) * 3600 + MINUTE(dateOne) * 60 +
       SECOND(dateOne);
           SET secondsTwo = HOUR(dateTwo) * 3600 + MINUTE(dateTwo) * 60 +
       SECOND(dateTwo);




       120
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



streets, iconography, and symbols indicating major monu-
ments celebrating the communist regime.
      Georeferencing this map reveals another level of ideol-
ogy, one that is not immediately legible in the cartographic
symbolic systems. While the interior spaces of East Berlin are
comparatively accurate when measured against Google’s sat-

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
    IF (secondsOne <= secondsTwo) THEN
      SET isLarger = 0;
ELSE
      SET isLarger = 1;
    END IF;
  END IF;
ELSE
  IF (YEAR(dateOne) < YEAR(dateTwo)) THEN
    SET isLarger = 0;
  ELSEIF (YEAR(dateOne) > YEAR(dateTwo)) THEN
    SET isLarger = 1;
  ELSEIF (DAYOFYEAR(dateOne) < DAYOFYEAR(dateTwo)) THEN
    SET isLarger = 0;
  ELSEIF (DAYOFYEAR(dateOne) > DAYOFYEAR(dateTwo)) THEN
    SET isLarger = 1;
  ELSE
    SET secondsOne = HOUR(dateOne) * 3600 + MINUTE(dateOne) * 60 +
SECOND(dateOne);
    SET secondsTwo = HOUR(dateTwo) * 3600 + MINUTE(dateTwo) * 60 +
SECOND(dateTwo);
    IF (secondsOne <= secondsTwo) THEN
      SET isLarger = 0;
    ELSE
      SET isLarger = 1;
    END IF;
  END IF;
END IF;
RETURN(isLarger);
END




121
       HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



       ellite imagery, the location of the Berlin Wall is consistently
       off by hundreds of meters in areas near the Brandenburg
       Gate and the region around Checkpoint Charlie and nearby
       border crossings. Although there is little visible distortion of
       the streets or even the river Spree, the map “bloats” the size of
       East Berlin in the interior and significantly expands East Ber-

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
       Documentation: a description of how it should work.


              ( DS) We take comfort, if not pleasure, in the dualistic

       opposition between the developmental sins of bugs and the
       virtues of features. The stranger world of undocumented
       features is a moral gray area between the two. MySQL’s
       documentation guarantees that DATETIME fields hold dates back
       to January 01, 1000, at 00:00:00 midnight. Ask it to store
       the date of the Imperial Procession of 404 CE, however, and
       it willingly complies. It turns out that any date back to the
       first second of the Common Era can fit comfortably in the
       DATETIME field.


              So why does the MySQL documentation not guarantee they
       will support dates beginning one second after 0 CE? Because
       they cannot guarantee it. The topsy-turvy world of date math
       requires that dates be stored as the number of seconds since
       a given period—today, that’s January 1, 1970 at midnight.
       Good enough for business data that extends back maybe to
       1900, but the majority of human history happened in the
       hundreds of billions of negative seconds.


              HyperCities extends into the negative billions
       (10,000 BCE, the earliest date HyperCities can store, is
       315,537,703,000 seconds BCE). A negative year in a DATETIME




       122
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



lin along this contested region of the Wall. In other words,
East Berlin is presented as “larger” than it really was, en-
croaching—quite consistently— hundreds of meters into
West Berlin as indicated by control points 13, 14, and 15. Only
through georeferencing this map is it possible to appreciate
the ideology operating at the level of the projection itself.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
field results in the unfriendliest of dates, 0000-00-00
00:00:00. Our solution: a flag indicating whether the date is
a BCE date. How to query on two fields at once? The solution:
dateLarger, the stored procedure reproduced above that I
still do not quite understand.


      What is the meaning of dateLarger? Another thousand
lines of code. Writing complex applications requires
converting table-based relational database records into
objects using a piece of code called an Object-Relational
Mapper (ORM). Friends in software development tell me to use
one of the many already-available ORMs, for writing your
own is the way of madness. After doing it myself, I agree.
But most ORMs assume that we never use stored procedures
to do comparisons. All but HyperCities’ simplest queries
use dateLarger, so ORMs are abstractions too leaky for
HyperCities. Hence my still-growing thousand lines of code.


      Of course, MySQL’s DATETIME is designed in a Gregorian
era for a Gregorian era. The date of 404 we assign is not
the actual date Honorius processed. And in our database, the
procession began at midnight, as good a time as any, for
precision is relentless: to be precise in the present, we
must be precise in the past. MySQL cannot allow fuzziness,
but its precision leads to more fuzziness.




123
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



      Of course, all maps encode ideologies. Ultimately, what
counts as “accuracy” is a function of the goals of the carto-
graphic representation: correct rice yields, planimetric preci-
sion, or keeping the citizenry of East Berlin in East Berlin?
Google Maps makes choices about what counts for accuracy:
making a map using a mathematical coordinate system in-
volves assumptions and omissions as much as making a map
where representing precise spatial relations is less important
than showing rice yields. The process of georeferencing is the
process of selecting one turtle, saying “this is it,” and placing
the other turtles on the back of the first. But the turtles never
really line up, and, hence, we are always in the realm of pro-
ductive deformance.
      So what’s at stake in using the projections and coordi-
nate systems deployed by Google Maps/Earth? For Hyper-
Cities, there are strategic and pragmatic reasons to under-
stand—and also to be able to deconstruct—the affordances,
assumptions, and ideologies of any standardized cultural
practice. The decolonization of knowledge may not be
achieved by (ambitiously) creating indigenous humanities
mapping platforms, but by strategically creating cracks and
fissures in the most pervasive, ubiquitous knowledge plat-
forms (such as Google Maps/Earth) and by dialectically tar-
rying with the negative of these platforms. Among other
things, this means enabling an unbounded multiplicity of
storytelling and counter-mapping that foregrounds contesta-
tion and alternative histories. In practice, it means the video
testimonies of sixteen-year-old immigrant youth from LA’s
Historic Filipinotown telling their life stories on maps that
can be opened simultaneously in scholarly narratives pro-
duced by tenured university professors, overlaid with decades
of census data, and rendered on historical maps that show the
history of redlining with the primary source reports created




124
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



by the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation in the late 1930s.
These “thick maps” exist in a platform built on Google Maps/
Earth, using the geographic information systems and satellite
imagery of the imperial imaginary. Are they consumed by it?
Do they inevitably speak its language? Or, perhaps, do these
thick mappings betray the limits, contingencies, historical
specificities, and exclusions of the dominant paradigm? The
bigger question is how to interrogate the spaces for the pro-
duction of what gets to count as knowledge at a given mo-
ment, the modalities for the production and ordering of dis-
course, and the conditions of possibility for the configuration
of knowledge into systems, classification schemas, representa-
tions, maps, and other ordering environments.64
      At its best, digital humanities helps to expose the data
structures and classification systems, epistemologies and
world-views, ordering systems and knowledge representations
in ways that foreground their incommensurabilities. To be
sure, we should imagine what it would mean to reconstruct an
indigenous cartography which does not reference European
geospatial systems or the ordering principles (planimetric,
bird’s eye perspective) upon which they rely. What, after all,
happens to those spatial representations that cannot be geo-
rectified because they betray entirely incommensurable spatial
systems rooted in different notions of proximity and distance,
memory and community, duration and extension? Far from
idle speculation, questions like this have formed the intellectu-
al agenda of the HyperCities project and its approach to thick
mapping. And, at the same time, we need to be able to decon-
struct the spatial systems that have emerged as “standards” and
“norms” by unmasking the world-views, relativizing the per-
spectives, and reanimating the voices that they left out.
      There is much work still to be done in designing plat-
forms that de-colonize knowledge and foreground epistemo-




125
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



logical incommensurabilities across cultures, languages, and
historical periods rather than reinforce structuring hierarchies,
standardized representational schemata, and exclusionary
knowledge systems. We might entertain a series of future map-
pings that, for example, are not about the past or the present
but are speculative, open-ended, and imaginary; or we might
model mapping in the conditional or subjunctive tense, a no-
tion that emphasizes what “might have been” or what “could
be.” In this regard, we might turn to the non-locative and ask:
what happens to the speculative, the fictive, the imaginary, the
non-real, the utopian, and the anarchic in the world of digital
mapping? How might, for example, a situationist politic be
re-appropriated as cultural critique? What would it mean to
imagine a system of mapping using different projection and
coordinate systems, of structuring relations based on models
that were founded on radically different epistemologies and
experiences of distance, duration, community, and relationali-
ty? What would such a “differential geography” look like and
how might humanists design such a mapping platform?
      On the other hand, what happens when we (willingly or
not so willingly) participate in ever thicker and homogenizing
social relations that enmesh real-time and real-space tracking
to create a world in which the physical and the virtual are
seamlessly connected in an augmented World Wide Web that
resides in human bodies and physical things in space? What
happens when the information web and the physical world are
intertwined in a way that makes it impossible to de-link? Does
the fully mapped earth radiate disaster triumphant? Might, for
example, East German Stasi maps of every microscopic ele-
ment of everyday life be among the “thickest maps” of all? In
this sense, thickness is tantamount to authoritarianism. And
what does it mean when this thickness is appropriated—on a
technological scale with no precedent—by the democratic




126
THE VIEW FROM ABOVE / BELOW



state, right here at home, through ubiquitous, inscrutable, and
unchecked programs of dataveillance?
       The challenge of inventing a “global cognitive mapping”
that does justice to the place of the individual subject within
ever-thickening systems of surveillance, mediation, network-
ing, control, and global flows is still before us.65 I think there
are imaginative, possibly liberating or even weakly redemptive
possibilities that could be invented and harnessed by “thick
mapping” in the digital humanities, but these formations must
be agile and strategic enough to perform their own decon-
struction, to facilitate practices of mapping and counter-map-
ping, to interrogate the assumptions and aims built into any
such practice. Such a deconstructive strategy is what Jean-
François Lyotard once termed “paralogy” for its “imaginative
invention” of giving rise to the unknown, disturbing the order
of reason, producing dissent, and imagining a new move from
within the order of things.66 The imaginative ability “to make a
new move or change the rules of the game” (52) by organizing
and “arranging data in a new way” (51), for example, lies at the
heart of curation or counter-mapping in a cultural-critical
mode. It teases out sites of tension and possibility that give
voice to particularity and expand notions of participation; it
destabilizes and de-ontologizes representational cartographies,
corporate platforms, and technologies—not to mention so-
called social truths and publicly accepted norms—through
new modes of interactivity, memory mapping, and conscious-
ness raising. Thick mapping in the digital humanities is a cul-
tural-critical praxis that engages not only with what is, but also
with what might be, could be, and ought to be. It this sense, it
is ultimately a kind of ethics, motivated by a responsibility to
the other, a curatorial care for what is past, and an openness to
what could be and might come. But, in the final and sobering
analysis, there are no guarantees.




127
W
3


Rome: Jumping
over the Line
According to myth, Romulus             leaps across and through fields,
founded Rome by gouging a fur-         approaches, data, space and time.
row to define the city’s area. When           The Visualizing Statues in the
his brother ignored the sanctity       Late Antique Roman Forum project
of this defining boundary, Romu-       represented our first step in a con-
lus killed him. This story stands      tinuing redesign of interface and
as a metaphor for the penalties        argumentation in digital human-
imposed when one transgresses          ities scholarship. It uses the Hy-
boundaries, whether topographic        perCities interface to incorporate
or disciplinary. At the same time,     geotemporally referenced ancient
it emphasizes the unrelenting          inscriptions and texts, pictures,
emphasis on lines as definers and      sculptures, reliefs, buildings, and
describers of environments. In the     urban spaces to interrogate the en-
twenty-first century, scholars reg-    try of Emperor Honorius to Rome
ularly jump over disciplinary lines,   in 404 CE. The NEH Digital Hu-
and move beyond 2-dimensionali-        manities Center Program support-
ty to consider kinesthetic and mul-    ed research on this topic by Gregor
tidimensional interrogations of the    Kalas (University of Tennessee)
historical record. Digital modeling    working with an interdisciplinary
capabilities, geo-browsers, remote     group at UCLA lead by Principal
sensing, geographic information        Investigators Diane Favro and
systems, and accessible aggregated     Chris Johanson. The project team
data sets promote thick mapping.       regularly met with Kalas in a recre-
From its inception the dynamic         ated 3D real-time simulation of the
HyperCities platform has enabled       late-antique Forum Romanum that
the exploration of content as well     operated as an idea-space. Moving
as content delivery systems, en-       together in the simulation the team
couraging scholars to take vertical,   collectively considered viewsheds,
animated, collaborative, iterative     speeds of passage, statuary place-


         128
WINDOWS




http://inscriptions.etc.ucla.edu




ments and orientations, inscrip-       text, embedded in the HyperCities
tion legibility and repetition. The    viewing panel running alongside
research process was an animated       the interactive 3D models. As the
interaction that facilitated the       readers progress through the text
blurring of boundaries between         on the sidebar, the views of the
disciplinary domains and source        models reposition to support the
materials. Kalas presented his fi-     argument. Other sections of the
nal interpretation as both a static,   web publication display informa-
textual narrative and as interactive   tion geotemporally, in a 2D map




129
W
3




with timeline, situating sculptures
and inscriptions in time and space,
directly linked to a comprehensive
database.
      The visitor to the Visualizing
Statues website encounters a sin-
gular argument, and the 3D simu-
lations and scholarly source mate-
rials on which it is based. The proj-
ect invites readers to leap directly
into the primary material and
evaluate the author’s assumptions
and interpretations, thus blurring
the distinction between hard pub-
lication and lab experimentation.
In effect, the thick map has mor-
phed into a thick environment that
negotiates historical and contem-
porary actions simultaneously. The
Visualizing Statues project helps
to level the playing field between
author and reader. The narrative,
overlaid in a Google Earth en-
vironment, provides continuous
spatial context. Unlike a tradition-
al, two-dimensional argument, at
no point does the narrative force
readers to combine plan and sec-
tion in order to situate themselves
in the space currently under dis-
cussion. Moreover, the visual idea


         130
WINDOWS




          space within which the author
          works is now exposed to the read-
          er. Rome of the fifth century and
          its reconstructed monuments, the
          hypothetical locations of statuary,
          and the proposal for the imperial
          program of visuality in 404 CE are
          not imagined concepts, built from
          ekphrastic language, but instead
          are transformed into visual objects
          fit for study and interrogation in
          their own right.
                 Looking forward, it is not
          enough to fly from paragraph to
          paragraph like a digital, disembod-
          ied flâneur in a static city built of
          layered static maps. Always iter-
          ating, the research process breaks
          again across the line in lockstep
          with new technological affordanc-
          es. Rather than fly above, we will
          soon drop down to ground level,
          to walk the cartographic streets as
          embodied avatars. Aiming to blur
          the distinction between map and
          experience, as we iterate forward
          we are combining gaming technol-
          ogy with the HyperCities blueprint
          to build an inhabitable world of
          maps and arguments. The sidebar
          interface of HyperCities remains,



131
W
3




but a new narrative now runs in-       move through the space, but they
side a fully experiential, 3D world.   also collaborate on live interpreta-
The reader’s view becomes more         tions, reading aloud as they move,
than a simple camera, but a digital    commenting as they go, activating
approximation of embodiment.           spaces by their presence—from
Visualizations of historic environ-    oratorical platforms, to ritual areas.
ments will vary, including both        The activity of the avatars builds
attempts at verism and experimen-      a moving map, and takes steps
tal sketches of ideas—resembling       toward creating a fully inhabited,
maps more than reality. The viewer     living map. In essence through
will simulate a walk through data-     their simulated embodiment and
bases of maps, whose 3D buildings      interaction, readers walking side-
are extruded from the cartographic     by-side assess the visual and tex-
footprints.                            tual argument embedded directly
      HyperCities celebrates           in the virtual world. By turning
multi-vocality, but to date, only      off and on maps and emphasizing
that of the authors, not the reader.   particular links for others in the
Today multiple readers log in to       world, they will transform the
read the Visualizing Statues project   landscape. Theirs is now a shared
but without any knowledge of the       experience of reading—a virtual
reader community simultaneously        journey, embedded in the thick-
engaging with the same argument.       est of maps, that requires virtual
One future connects these readers.     footsteps to move from point to
Users appear as avatars able to in-    point in a running narrative. This
teract with others as they explore     version of the embodied experi-
the arguments set out before them.     ence of argument, narrative, and
Their paths will be recorded, later    evolved map is not yet built, but
played back again as tours, com-       its foundations are in place. Rome-
ments, or critiques of the visual      Lab, the 3-year study centered on
scholarship on display. The readers    Spectacle in the Roman Republic,
simultaneously author as they          has already developed some of the



         132
WINDOWS




http://romelab.etc.ucla.edu




experimental infrastructure.           we can continually jump across the
A merger of this vision with that      line to make and to map?
of the HyperCities code-base is on     Diane Favro and Chris Johanson
the horizon. As always, HyperCit-
ies has no truck with hypotheticals.
Through rapid iteration, the pro-
cess moves ever forward through
a cycle of implementation, inven-
tion, and re-implementation. Why
limit ourselves to talk alone, when




133
W
4


Mapping the 2009
Election Protests in Tehran
On June 16, 2009, Iranians took        lence, they used placards displaying
to the streets en masse in protests    rhyming slogans against the rigged
never before seen or experienced       election. The government played
since the 1979 Islamic Revolution.     back by claiming the anti-govern-
The parents and grandparents           ment protests were taking place
who had ousted the Shah joined         only in northern Tehran, an affluent
their children and grandchildren       area with Western educated and
30 years later to protest the rigged   well-traveled citizens. (There is a
re-election of Mahmoud Ah-             strong class division between north
madinejad. Labeling his regime         and south Tehran, and the govern-
a “coup government,” they held         ment’s claims are easily accepted by
peaceful, silent demonstrations in     the population in other provinces
contrast to what is by its very na-    where they only know of this divi-
ture a violent act.                    sion in Tehran and base many as-
      The first footage of thousands   sumptions on this fact.) From here,
upon thousands of protesters,          the protests gain momentum, and
spanning the width of a number         on June 20, they turn violent.
of grand boulevards across Teh-              This is the point where my
ran—Vali-ye-Asr, Enghelab, and         mapping project begins—an
Azadi—as far as the eye could see,     anger-infused and emotionally
sent chills down my spine. How         draining task that I saw as my duty
could the Iranian government sup-      to a homeland I barely know and
press this magnitude of discontent?    only from childhood memories
Quite simple: by broadcasting the      of summers spent with grandpar-
silent footage and claiming they       ents and cousins. My goal was to
are pro-government. Given that all     debunk the government’s claims
media in Iran are state-controlled,    by showing that the protests are in
the protesters cannot broadcast any    fact widespread, happening in all
counter arguments, so they changed     provinces across Iran, regardless of
their game: still protesting in si-    class and ethnicity.

         134
WINDOWS




Tools and Methods
The protests across Iran were en-
thusiastically dubbed the first so-
cial media or “Twitter Revolution.”
Indeed, Twitter, YouTube, and Face-
book played a major role in organi-
zation and communication among
protesters, and between them and
foreign observers; however, they
fell short in creating a cohesive
and easy-to-follow environment
due to their single-event character,
multi-temporality, and lack of a
collective timeline. To bring the
events together and to successfully
disseminate information about
them, I needed, first, accurate and
time-stamped information of the
events as they were unfolding; and
second, a place to map the data.
       Finding information was
not difficult as the protesters im-
mediately popularized a hashtag
#IranElection with a staggering
221,774 tweets per hour. After
hours of analysis and cross-refer-
encing of tweets to other tweets
and YouTube videos, I pinpointed
the protesters giving accurate in-
formation on the events, and those

135
W
4




          with a wider network across other
          provinces. In order to gain their
          trust—since government operatives
          caught on to Twitter and were us-
          ing it to track protesters or to prop-
          agate misinformation—I would
          share new proxy information to
          bypass internet censorship, a highly
          sought-after barter-commodity
          in a Digital Black Market kind of
          way. (A Bay Area IT programmer,
          Austin Heap, consistently provided
          incredible proxy server support
          to protesters.) This allowed me to
          request specific types of informa-
          tion, primarily precise location and
          time-stamps as close as possible to
          the events.
                For mapping the informa-
          tion, my first instinct was to use
          Google Maps, and by making the
          maps public I could send the in-
          formation out to protest leaders
          and organizers across Iran. The
          goal was to boost morale in the
          face of censored news and delib-
          erate media silence on the events
          despite obvious unrest in the cities.
          Because of the control of state
          media, the provinces are isolated
          from each other and from Tehran.
          For those people living outside

    136
WINDOWS




of the province of Tehran, if they      time led to an interesting study of
believed protests were not hap-         protest slogans. I had been com-
pening in the capital, they would       paring slogans (chants and written
easily abandon their efforts. Also,     signage) to make sure, for exam-
seeing the reach and occurrence of      ple, that the Quds Day protest
the protests in videos and images       videos were from 2009, not 2008.
is far more powerful than reading       While fact-checking I noticed how
and hearing scattered information       the slogans shaped the momen-
online or through word of mouth.
While Google Maps facilitated
the mapping of links to city-by-
city photographs and videos, the
general layout and organization of
the information was still visually
hidden in links of titles to the win-
dows holding the photographs and
videos. At this point, HyperCities
proved to be an ideal platform
because all text and visual infor-
mation could be mapped and dis-
played chronologically and visual-
ly—the windows holding the infor-
mation could be opened to reveal
all visual information at once, and
by scrolling through the minutes of
a single day, one could immediately
get a sense of the events.

Emergent Information
Placing the information in visual
and chronological order and ana-
lyzing it for accuracy of date and

137
W
4




tum of the masses, and also how             Brave and fearless I am
media changed the slogans. What             I am the owner of this soil
the protesters were chanting was
not necessarily aimed at the coup      The slogan was aimed at the Su-
government, but was a message for      preme Leader’s son and coup lead-
Western media, to show the true        er, Mojtaba Khamenei. From the
position of the people in regards to   point of view of the protesters the
their government. Another facet to     government is an oligarchy based
the language of opposition during      on favoritism and familial ties, and
this time was an increase of new       no different than the hereditary
poetry blogs, as well as a switch to   system of the ousted monarchy.
poetry on existing blogs to avoid      Interestingly, the wording also
censorship and imprisonment.           implies racial inferiority, being
Iran has a terrible record of im-      non-Persian. Whereas the monar-
prisoning and torturing bloggers       chy consisted of Iranians celebrat-
(Hoder is still in prison; Omidreza    ing Persian values, these Islamic
Mirsayafi was killed in prison on      leaders’ loyalty is to an inferior cul-
March 19, 2009; and Sattar Be-         ture—observant and mass-prac-
heshti was killed in prison around     ticed and publicized Islam—and
November 10, 2012).                    not in tune with the Islam of mod-
      Of all slogans, the one that     ern Iranians—secular and personal
has stayed with me, and surpris-       Islam intertwined with Persian
ingly made the most impact since I     traditions. It is important to note
made a specific entry for it on June   that the Islamic clerics and leaders
16, is this one:                       have been trying to replace and
                                       even outright ban traditional Per-
     You are the dust and dirt		       sian holidays, such as Chaharshan-
     Inferior and less than dirt 		    be-Suri, which became a huge day
     I am the light, I am the salt     of protest later in the year. Many
     I am the love-blind warrior       other Iranian-centric slogans ap-
     You are the blind force           peared and immediately became
     You are the darkness              popular. This is significant because

         138
WINDOWS




for the first time since the Islamic
Revolution, Iranians are also ab-
stractly hinting at a separation of
religion and state, something that
can easily earn someone the title of
“mohhareb,” an enemy of Islam. It
carries the death penalty. However,
by November 4, the anniversary of
the take-over of the US Embassy
in Tehran, the protesters become
more brazen, openly chanting:
“Our race is Aryan, separate Reli-
gion and Politics!”
      In all, the archive that I cre-
ated mapped 22 critical days and
more than 400 distinct events in
Tehran between June 16, 2009, and
February 10, 2010, using YouTube
videos, Flickr photos, Twitter,
Facebook, and other social media
to create a digital record of the
protests: screams, gunshots, beat-
ings, clashes, blocked streets, sites
of safety, and people killed. Many
are very hard to watch, as they are
maps of events, people, and voices
no longer on the map.
Xárene Eskandar




139
Mapping Events/
Mapping Social
Media
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––


Participatory Digital Humanities
  If there is a utopian idea at the core of
(TP)



the digital humanities, it would have to
be the notion of “participation without
condition”—that is to say, participation
in the creation of the cultural record
of humanity regardless of facticity and,
hence, not dependent upon or restricted
by race, gender, class, religion, ethnicity,
nationality, age, language, access to
technology, or education. Participation
without condition means that anyone can tell his or her story,
bear witness to events, and contribute to the collective record
of humankind. This is both a retrospective and prospective
record, historical and future-oriented at the same time, as the
archive is not simply a question of what is past but, perhaps
more urgently, a question of what is to come, a responsibility
to a future that embraces, knows, and is informed by its many
pasts.
       Within public digital humanities scholarship, the
concept of “participatory” has assumed critical importance
insofar as it connotes the creation of conditions for
engagement with communities and individuals not
traditionally involved with humanities research and the
documentation of culture.67 Participatory is arrayed against
the rules of prohibition and exclusion, the rarefaction
principles and fellowships of discourse that Michel Foucault
exposed in the creation of knowledge hierarchies and closed
communities of practitioners.68 In its best sense, participatory
culture is open-ended, non-hierarchical, and trans-migratory,
aimed at reestablishing contact with the non-philosophical,
the heterogeneous, the people and perspectives left out,
erased, and vanished. Participation without condition is
not a principle that can be willed into place, but rather is an
ideal to build toward through imaginative speculation and
ethically informed engagement, one which promises—in the
Derridean sense of the arrivant—to go beyond the limits and
boundaries erected by prior formations of the humanities.69
It is a motivating value rooted deep in the humanities, not
a reality that can be built using technologies (although
technologies can be enabling of new configurations for
participation as well as their dialectical underbelly, new
configurations for surveillance, control, and oppression).
      Over the past decade, digital humanities scholarship has




141
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities




142
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



begun to render the walls of the universi-
ty porous by engaging with significantly
broader publics in the design, creation,
and dissemination of knowledge. By con-
ceiving of scholarship in ways that foun-
dationally involve community partners,
cultural institutions, the private sector,
non-profits, government agencies, and
ever-broader slices of the general public,
digital humanities expands both the no-
tion of scholarship and the public sphere
in order to create new sites and nodes of
engagement, documentation, and collab-
oration. With such an expanded defini-
tion of scholarship, digital humanists are
able to place questions of social justice
and civic engagement, for example, front-
and-center; they are able to revitalize the
cultural record in ways that involve citi-
zens in the academic enterprise and bring
the academy into the expanded public
sphere.
      The result is a form of scholarship
that is, by definition, translational and ap-
plied: it applies the knowledge and meth-
ods of the humanities to pose new ques-
tions, to design new possibilities, and to
create citizen-scholars who value the com-
plexity, ambiguity, and differences that
comprise our cultural record as a species.
      The “Voices of January 25th” and
“Voices of February 17th” documentary
projects are compelling examples of how




143
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



social technologies like Twitter can be used to give voice to
people who were silenced in the 2011 revolutions in Egypt
and Libya. Started by John Scott-Railton, then a graduate stu-
dent at UCLA, the projects used Twitter to disseminate sup-
pressed messages from dissidents to the world. Scott-Railton
began the Voices of January 25th project when Egypt effec-
tively “turned off ” the Internet between January 28 and Feb-
ruary 2, 2011.
      Relying on cell phones and later landlines, Scott-Railton
began calling friends in
Egypt who knew protesters
and could provide highly
localized, accurate accounts
of what was happening on
the ground. He assembled a
network of trusted infor-
mants who agreed to have
their phone calls recorded
and their voices published to
the world on AudioBoo, an
audio hosting service.
Scott-Railton, then, posted
messages to Twitter, often
with links to audio files and
other media reports that
would help the world “see”
and “hear” what was going
on in Egypt in real-time. In effect, the digital portal became a
global public sphere, however fragile and endangered, that
was fundamentally linked to the deeply embodied and pre-
cisely located events on the ground. The voices are now part
of a living web archive and documentary memorial.70
      While the role of social media has been feverishly de-




144
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



bated in fomenting, planning, and sustaining revolutions
since Twitter was first hailed—somewhat exaggeratedly—as a
revolutionary technology in Moldova in 2009 and YouTube
became a people’s archive for election protests in Tehran
during the summer of that same year,71 it seems incontestable
that the “public images” produced by broadcast media (often
singular, uni-directional, and hierarchical) are being sup-
planted by decentralized, multi-directional “public utteranc-
es” that are changing the way in which events unfold, become
                                  represented, and are dissem-
                                  inated (almost instanta-
                                  neously) on a global scale.
                                  Two decades ago, Paul Viril-
                                  io thought that the physical
                                  space of the public sphere
                                  had become replaced by the
                                  media of the “public image”;
                                  but now we are seeing the
                                  reassertion of the public
                                  sphere through radically
                                  non-Cartesian geographies
                                  enabled by what I earlier
                                  termed the web’s “contiguity
                                  of the non-contiguous.”72
                                        What this means is a
                                  massive contraction and
                                  alignment of the event (an
embodied and location-specific phenomenon), the represen-
tation of the event (through Twitter messages, blogs, video,
and photographs captured and uploaded from mobile
phones, and so forth), and the dissemination of the represen-
tation (through web-based social networks and information
channels). But more than just an alignment of event, repre-




145
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



sentations, and dissemination, we are also seeing complex
feedback loops in which the representations and dissemina-
tions instantaneously influence the course of events. As such,
the event is no longer the same event because it is constantly
re-constituted by other events, representations, and dissemi-
nations that recursively coalesce. The result is a significantly
more adaptable, amorphous, global, but also ephemeral, pub-
lic sphere, one which may, for example, be constituted as a
contiguous space connecting Westwood, California, and, si-
multaneously, Tahrir Square in Cairo or Benghazi, Libya.
       At the same time, we need to be critical and suspicious
of any evidentiary function of social media, not only because
they can be easily manipulated and are hard (although not
impossible) to verify, but also because social media can be
used by anyone, in the service of both democratic and au-
thoritarian ends. And even with the best intentions, social
media can amplify misinformation on a global scale, creating
an echo chamber of falsehoods that are easily accepted as
truths by virtue of their sheer repetition. There is no clarity
of meaning or channels of truth to be found here, only multi-
ple levels of mediation within complex and ever-shifting dy-
namics of power and participation. We are just beginning to
understand the transformative possibilities, which are imbri-
cated in ideologies of control—but also possibilities of de-
mocratization—of these multi-mediated public spaces.
       Around the same time that Scott-Railton began the
Voices of January 25th project, the HyperCities team created
a mash-up for live streaming and archiving Twitter feeds
from Egypt and visualizing them on a Google Map. The proj-
ect, “HyperCities Now,” made live calls to the standard Twit-
ter search API for tweets originating within 200 miles of Cai-
ro’s city center and containing hashtags such as #jan25 or
#egypt. This feed then placed the tweets on a Google Map,




146
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



displaying a new tweet every four seconds, and populating an
endless time-bar, down to the granularity of a single second,
across the top of the interface. Although not 100% accurate,
the tweets’ location is based on users’ self-reported profile
locations, or coordinates provided by their cell phones. Sensi-
tive to the risks involved in creating an archive that precisely
maps Twitter users, messages, and location, the HyperCities
team truncated the exact latitude and longitude (when it was
returned by Twitter’s location parameter) at the hundredths
decimal place, effectively placing a tweet within a 2 mile radi-
us, rather than at an exact GPS location. Over the course of
several weeks, about 450,000 tweets from Egypt were ar-
chived, with the most tweets (nearly 10,000) occurring in the
hour in which Mubarak gave his resignation speech on Feb-
ruary 11, 2011.
      In all, the project archived tweets and retweets from
about 40,000 distinct Twitter users documenting the events
of the Egyptian Revolution. While this number is significant
(and it will provide the basis of our analysis below), we need
to bear in mind that only about 5% of Egyptians actually
used social media during the revolution, and most Twitter
users were part of a fairly homogeneous group in terms of
education level, class, and generation.73 It would be a mistake
to equate the Twitter archive with the Egyptian revolution or
suggest that it singularly catalyzed the revolution. As Ramesh
Srinivasan has argued, tweets from the revolution tended to
reflect the democratic ideals of the more educated protesters,
while working class protesters in Tahrir Square (who were
not on Twitter but formed the majority of protesters) tended
to express more pragmatic and economic reasons for their
dissent, such as skyrocketing food prices.74
      Scott-Railton’s “voices” project represents a wider (and
arguably more reliable) cross-section of constituencies since




147
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



the conversations were with different generations of protest-
ers via cell phone and landlines and only published to Twit-
ter once he verified the accuracy of the information. Unlike
the algorithmically aggregated, displayed, and archived data
of “HyperCities Now,” Scott-Railton’s work was possible be-
cause of ever-expanding, although deeply fragile, networks of
human witnesses who trusted him to listen to, steward, and
relay what they saw, heard, and experienced. In this sense, the
project accords with an earlier project of curation created by
Xárene Eskandar, also a graduate student at UCLA, docu-
menting, day-by-day and often hour-by-hour and sometimes
even minute-by-minute, the election protests in Tehran
during the summer and fall of 2009. Utilizing the HyperCit-
ies platform, Eskandar painstakingly documented gunfire,
protest sites, photographs, Twitter messages, and YouTube
videos, creating a geo-chronology for hundreds of reports
and media objects that she found online and through net-
works of contacts. This project, like Scott-Railton’s, was pro-
foundly connected to the original etymology of the term cu-
ration, meaning “care of souls” or, in some cases, “stewardship
of the dead.” Both sought to curate—care for, preserve, docu-
ment, and archive—the lives, experiences, and actions of the
protesters for a global audience, despite (or perhaps because
of) the precarious material, social, and technical conditions
of possibility for the very stories.
      While HyperCities Now curates data in different ways,
it has an analogous goal of expanding the concept of the
public sphere through an ethic of amplifying participation.
Each of these projects was deployed extremely quickly—in a
matter of days—as experiments or prototypes to intervene in
an event that was still unfolding and unbounded. Far from
complete or total archives documenting “the whole history”
of the revolution, they are motivated by several principles




148
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



that I think accord with critical theory as a socially engaged
praxis: a respect for multiplicity and difference through the
creation of trusted social bonds, an approach to historical
documentation that builds from the fragments of participa-
tory discourse, and a concept of archivization made possible
by the contingent material technologies of communication
(ranging from mobile phones, social media applications, and
decentralized data centers to MySQL, PHP, and JSON feeds).
These archives are not simply documents of the past (“what
was”) but are spectral, in that they pose haunting questions
about the possibility of a future and, therefore, are motivated
by a responsibility or promise that remains open and unde-
termined. As much as we may hope for a coming democracy,
the future may also bring the disaster, and this is something
with which these projects hauntingly reckon.
      In addition to Egypt, the HyperCities team mapped and
archived Twitter feeds from Libya as well as Japan following
the earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear disaster. In the case of
Japan, precise location was important for coordinating disas-
ter relief and remains a priority in other mapping projects
undertaken by the team, including one called “Bishamon,”
which aims to precisely track airborne radiation contamina-
tion from the Fukushima power plant. Spearheaded by a
team of volunteers from GISCorps and CrisisCommons, the
project initially mapped hundreds of thousands of social me-
dia feeds onto GIS data (including flood zones, evacuation
centers, traffic, and public phone locations) so that real-time
decisions for coordinating relief efforts could be made. It has
evolved in a number of directions through collaborations
between UCLA’s Institute for Digital Research and Educa-
tion, led by Yoh Kawano and David Shepard, and other insti-
tutions, including Harvard University and Niigata University      http://beta.jdarchive.
in Japan. With Harvard, the UCLA team provided extensive          org/en/home




149
                 HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



                 content for the “Digital Archive of Japan’s 2011 Disasters,” and
                 with Niigata University, the team has developed a web inter-
                 face and visualization tool for mapping real-time radiation
                 levels. These projects are discussed more extensively below.



                 On the Event: HyperCities Now
                 (Egypt, Libya, Japan)


                 Every event is singular but enmeshed in an infinite
                 number of other events (space).

The event, its representation, and the dissemination
of the representation coalesce in feedback loops in
which the event is never the same.

                                Events happen on bodies and are expressed
                                in language and through visual media.

                 Events are processes of becoming with
                 multiple temporalities.

                 The event has no end (time).
                       ( TP) A message flashes on the screen. It is by a user who

                 goes by the handle PortSa3eedy: “Chants in Tahrir: ‘Muslims,
                 Christians, We are One.’ This is the rebirth of a country, with
                 a feeling that anything is possible #Egypt.” The time is Febru-
                 ary 11, 2011, 07:22:55 PM in Egypt. It’s about an hour after
                 Mubarak delivered his resignation speech. The location re-
                 turned is city-center Cairo. The Twitter message stays on the
                 screen for about four seconds, before another message flashes
                 on the screen. I watch for hours, as thousands of messages ap-




                 150
MAPPING EVENTS: FROM TAHRIR SQUARE TO TOHOKU, JAPAN




                                                                  (26)




pear and disappear on the map, which shifts as the location
changes. It is a mesmerizing experience, quite unlike that of
watching television, where reporters “go on location” to inter-
view, at most, a few dozen eyewitnesses and provide pre-di-
gested commentary and analysis for the viewers’ consumption.
       Watching HyperCities Now, I have no idea what to ex-
pect from the people “speaking” through Twitter. It’s a raw,
live, and unpredictable cacophony of voices, expressing hope,
joy, and unbounded openness to a future in which anything
seems possible. There are thousands of such voices, each em-
bodied in messages of 140 characters in length and posted to
Twitter, most likely through web-enabled mobile phones.
Many are voices of people in Tahrir Square at this very mo-
ment in time, reaching out to a public that far exceeds the




151
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



apprehension of any human listener in this place, at this time.
On Twitter, the singularity of the voice is transported, re-
fracted, and multiplied. It becomes part of a collective event
and attaches itself to anyone ready to listen, anyone attuned
to its message, anyone standing open.
       Every tweet that flashes up on the screen is a pure event.
It cannot be predicted and, in a sense, breaks free of time; yet
when it happens, the tweet is utterly bound to a “kernel of
time” (Zeitkern). In the same way, the tweet cannot be speci-
fied precisely on a map ahead of time, but when it happens, it
is utterly “incarnated,” the action, thought, and message of a
person in a particular place. As a viewer, I cannot know when
a tweet will come, from where it will come, who will send it,
and what it will say. In this sense, it is a flash, a moment of
truth of someone sending a message into the ether.
       Only after the event can we begin to make sense of it as
an event, by putting it in a timeline, by considering it as part
of a network, by analyzing it for meaning, by investigating it
as a part of a whole. This is the realm of hermeneutics, com-
putational analysis, statistics, historical interpretation and
explication. It happens after the fact.
       There are three kinds of temporality at work in Hyper-
Cities Now:

The first is the time of the flash, the Aion as pure event, the
Twitter message that appears on the map at a singular mo-
ment in time. It is an absolute surprise, utterly unexpected
and unpredictable, even though its conditions of possibility
can be anticipated and its context understood. This is the
“now-time,” the flash Walter Benjamin called the Jetztzeit, an
instant or eruption that distills or contracts the present and
harbors the notion of the revolutionary, the messianic, the
possibility of a future that cannot be derived from the stock




152
of historical experiences. Anything is possible: justice, de-
mocracy, freedom, but also the violent backlash, the disaster,
the catastrophic.

The second kind of temporality is that harbored in the event
as network, when it becomes an event with hopes and expec-
tations of a future that is not yet and memories and traces of
a past that is no longer. It is reflected in the viewer’s percep-
tion of the flash itself: when we—those who are corporeally
“uninvolved” in the event, those who are “far away” as specta-
tors—perceive the Aion, the event has already happened (it is
no longer) and another event is about to happen (it is not yet).
In both, there is a deep contingency. Recalling Aristotle’s defi-
nition, the contingent is that which is neither necessary nor
impossible. It didn’t have to happen this way, and it could have
been otherwise.




153
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities




The third kind of temporality is that of Chronos, the histori-
cal time in which events occur, the timeline of events within
chronological time, which help us make sense of events for
analysis, comparison, and hermeneutical interpretation. It is
the archive of tweets, searchable by hour and day, viewable by
minute and second, in relationship to every other tweet by any
other user who also used certain hashtags to describe, docu-
ment, or otherwise witness events on the ground, in Egypt,
during the revolution that began on January 25, 2011.

      Start-dates are comparatively straightforward to assign,
especially when world-historical events have demarcated trig-
gers, such as January 25, 2011, or March 11, 2011, the day of
the earthquake, which struck at 2:46 PM, and tsunami that
enveloped Japan shortly after (3:38 PM). Such events cannot
be readily derived from prior history (although their mean-
ings and understandings will inherit much from the stock of
historical knowledge and experience). They could not have




154
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



been predicted to occur on that day, at that time. For that rea-
son, world-historical events are first of all events that cannot
yet be comprehended. They don’t yet have full meaning be-
cause they are eruptions, fissures that are violently torn from
the everyday. For someone “inside” the event (by which I
mean someone whose body is affected by the event, who is
physically proximate to the event and is, therefore, touched by
it in a way that is different from someone who experiences the
event through mediations and representations alone), it is im-
possible to know the extension and duration of the event, its
scope and scale, its impact and significance, its resonance and
meaning. The event is happening, and only later, with the pas-
sage of time and the (comparative) clarity of distance, can
eyewitnesses make sense of the event by perceiving its con-
tours. For someone “outside” the event (whose body is ostensi-
bly safe and untouched), the event assumes certain contours
right away, even if these contours are erroneous or incom-
plete, through the media in which it is represented and dis-
seminated (on television, on radio, on the web, via Twitter,
and so forth). It is foremost a spectatorial event, which also
has the effect of placing the viewer in a precarious ethical re-
lationship to the suffering of those “inside” the event.
       I watched the Twitter streams flash on the map from the
safety of my desk in my office at UCLA, placing me in a
questionable ethical position of a privileged observer of
events that I took no part in. For the person sending a mes-
sage, the vulnerabilities cannot be overstated: who is to know
if the message will be tracked and put into another kind of
database, not one that archives the voices of history but one
that aims to squelch those very voices? Who is to know if
data will be harvested by others in order to more fully exert
control and homogenize history? I am only an ethical specta-
tor—a witness to the witnesses—if I am willing to be open to




155
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



the message or voice of the other, whether the call for help,
the call for solidarity, or the wish to know, document, and
remember. I am a witness to the witnesses for the sake of a
future to come.
      But when does an event “end”? Who would dare say, at
any given moment, that it is now over, that people who were
there can (or should) “get on with their lives”? The event has
no end for anyone who has survived a catastrophe, who has
lost their family, who has been exposed to radiation, or who
has risked everything for a future democracy. And not only
does the event not have a temporal end, but every event
opens up onto an infinite number of other events—both
smaller and larger, directly related and tangential—at any
given moment. Every event is part of a network of infinitely
many events, which are impossible to specify or document in
their entirety. Events are ever thicker networks of events, no
matter how zoomed in or zoomed out one is. There is neither
an end, in a temporal sense, nor an end in a spatial sense, to
the event. In this regard, Gilles Deleuze was quite right in his
argument that every event is singular (Aion) but enmeshed
in and emerging out of and into an infinite number of other
events: “each event communicates with all others and they all
form one and the same Event, an event of the Aion where
they have an eternal truth.”75

Chronos
      ( TP) The HyperCities team developed “HyperCities Now”

over the course of three days in late January of 2011, as a way
to visualize and archive social media messages sent through
Twitter relating to the events unfolding in Egypt.
      During the days that the Internet was shut down in
Egypt, the data are very limited. We started archiving on
January 30 and stopped on February 25, not because the




156
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



event was “over” but because we kept crashing our hosting
service (and received several requests to terminate all scripts
that we were running on their servers). Moreover, we wanted
to establish a reliable partnership with our Digital Library for
metadata creation and data preservation as well as a process
and methodology for archiving “social media/events.” We
had made the decision early on to archive only tweets with a
location parameter (either provided by the user or from the
user’s device), for the sake of more likely archiving tweets
from people who were there on the ground.
      To be sure, this decision already precludes certain
questions from being asked, such as how events in Egypt
resonated on a global scale or in other national or regional
contexts. The idea of focusing on tweets with a location
parameter within a 200 mile radius of Cairo’s city center with
certain hashtags (#jan25, #tahrir, and #egypt) was to sift out
some of the inevitable “noise” that could easily swallow up
or mute the voices on the ground. In a little more than three
weeks, the HyperCities Now team streamed and archived more
than 450,000 tweets, mostly in Egyptian Arabic and English.
      A few weeks later, the disasters struck Japan and the
team immediately enabled the streaming and archiving of
Twitter messages from the entire region around the epicenter
of the earthquake, near Sendai, Japan. At first, Twitter feeds
on maps functioned as real-time “reporting” for coordinating
disaster relief, especially when social media data could be
linked with other GIS data, such as flood zones, blocked
roads, and functional cell phone towers. We began to analyze
the Twitter feeds from Egypt and the Japanese disasters from
the standpoint of a multiplicity of scales and within networks
of different kind of relations. It would be (nearly) impossible,
of course, for any human to read and react to all the tweets,
as they are also embedded in a network of infinitely many




157
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



other tweets, photographs, weblinks, and other documents
attesting to events. The scale defies human comprehension,
whether it’s the 700 million total Twitter messages during the
month after the earthquake and tsunami in Japan or even the
significantly smaller sample of 660,000 messages archived by
UCLA that were bound by geolocation and certain hashtags.
      As such, the team focused on scaling data to answer var-
ious kinds of questions, essentially “toggling” between the sin-
gular voice or story of a particular eyewitness and global, ag-
gregate experiences. The latter does not represent the reality
of “Tahrir Square” or “the earthquake and tsunami” (as com-
plete or total events) but rather the totality of our archive, and
therefore, can only reveal structures, patterns, and visualiza-
tions of the archive’s data. This is not entirely distinct from
what historians already do, insofar as they select source mate-
rials and emplot events at various levels of “zoom” in order to
convey different kinds of meaning. In other words, scholars of
history frequently find themselves “toggling” back-and-forth
between macro-level accounts of the event (zoomed out) and
micro-level accounts of individual experiences (zoomed in),
which are, by their very nature, defined by their specific expe-
riences, perspectives, spectatorship, language, and so forth.
      Zoomed out, computational analysis of “big data” allows
us to visualize and interpret over-arching structures, relation-
ships, and patterns, something that accords with the method-
ological and theoretical approaches that have begun to
emerge in fields variously called “culturnomics” or “cultural
analytics,” to use the term coined by Lev Manovich to de-
scribe the quantitative analysis of large-scale cultural data-
sets.76 In practice, it is similar to the work of “distant reading”
described by literary scholar Franco Moretti as a practice
that moves away from the close, hermeneutical reading of
individual texts in favor of an algorithmic approach that




158
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



aims to visualize and understand entire corpora through at-
tention to systems, structures, patterns, and trends.77
       Whole corpus analysis potentially facilitates the democ-
ratization of knowledge, as no subset of texts becomes canon-
ical. Instead of privileging “human reading” (in which we nec-
essarily have to limit ourselves to a tiny canon of works or a
small selection of reports, documents, and voices), distant
reading is performed by a computer and can easily “read”
thousands, if not millions, of works. As such, “distance listen-
ing” to Twitter feeds from around the world might one day
facilitate a democratization of witnessing, since it has a level-
ing effect in that all utterances are granted equal importance
and weight, such that no one voice takes priority or assumes
canonicity. This democratizing effect is, of course, always a
product of the data records and the data structures of the da-
tabase, which may be ultimately agnostic to content, individu-
al experiences, and even individuals, but are still produced by
human beings who make decisions about what data to cap-
ture, how to structure it, and how to make it useful.
      ( DS) In this regard, data are not preexisting,

observable facts that supposedly exist “out there,”
independent of the observer, waiting to be visualized;
instead, they are a function of the means by which they are
captured and the interpretive decisions made. As Johanna
Drucker has pointed out, all data are really capta, and
visualizations should acknowledge the observer’s role
“using interpretations that arise in observer­codependence,
characterized by ambiguity and uncertainty, as the basis
on which a representation is constructed.”78 Our archive
of tweets might be better characterized as a “captaset”:
a collection of utterances by those who used Twitter to
comment on (and perhaps, to a certain extent, influence)
events, sampled from the data Twitter made publicly available




159
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



through its API. We privileged some hashtags (#egypt, #jan25,
and #tahrir) over others. And, of course, Twitter itself
is a self-selecting community, primarily youth, many from
educated and wealthier backgrounds, who had access to this
technology.79




Egypt: A Global View

       ( DS)   What allows us to call the Egyptian revolution an
“event”? We cannot have faith in a definition of the event
in the singular, a suspect concept once we begin to consider
events in layered, multi-functional contexts. Instead, what
if we imagine an event as a network, and try to visualize it
as such? Networks invite us to imagine peers working together
to pass on information, without official communication
channels. Network analysis is an apt method for analyzing
events represented and enacted through social media. Ideas
(whose signifiers are hashtags) are simply nodes, manifested
only by the individual acts of communication users send to
each other. The diversity of discourse bears witness to the
complexity of an event and the number of people and messages
involved; in theory, networks show many revolutions rather
than one revolution.
       Figure 21 shows all the hashtags used in tweets gathered
by “HyperCities Now” during the early period of the Egyptian
revolution80; each node is a hashtag and a line between
two nodes represents the messages that contained those two
hashtags.81 This is the global level of an event on Twitter.
Nodes’ size reflects how frequently they were mentioned. We
recorded these tweets by tracking three hashtags: #jan25,
#egypt, and #tahrir, but 3,520 other hashtags occur with




160
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



                                        (21) Network
                                        graph of
                                        hashtags
                                        used during
                                        the Egyptian
                                        Revolution.




161
               HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



(22) Egypt’s
“Other
Countries”
community.




               these three hashtags. This network looks like a galaxy with
               the three tags we tracked as the suns that exert their pull
               on the other stars.
                      Alongside its suns, this galaxy has solar systems.
               In network theory, these are called “communities,” sets
               of nodes more strongly connected to each other than to
               other nodes.82 Colors highlight different communities. The
               red nodes are those most strongly connected to the three
               central nodes. This is the “Egyptian revolution” community.
               Not surprisingly, it is the largest. There is another
               smaller one, centered on #mubarak. There are, in fact, 200




               162
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



                                        (23) Network
                                        graph of
                                        hashtags
                                        used during
                                        Libyan
                                        revolution.




163
               HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



(24) Libya’s
”Other
Countries”
community.




               communities; most are just too small to see.
                      These solar systems/communities have their own centers,
               which highlight the many centers in a galaxy of hashtags.
               Derrida argues in “Structure, Sign and Play” that the center
               is a function not an intrinsic unity, a site of origin,
               or a telos.83 What if the “function” of our center is a
               math function? In this case, it is the Louvain method for
               community detection, which discovers latent patterns in
               networks.84 It shows that networks of speakers self-organize
               their communications around particular topics.
                      In Figure 22, we see yet another community, “other




               164
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



                                        (25) Merged
                                        network graph
                                        of hashtags
                                        in Egyptian
                                        and Libyan
                                        revolutions.




165
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



countries.” Its hashtags are mostly the names of other
countries or key places where Arab Spring movements
occurred. #libya is its strongest node, about 9% of the
size of #egypt and #jan25. This community shows the
discourse surrounding the Egyptian revolution opening
to other events, which are related yet distinct. One
event opens to others, showing the porousness of event
boundaries, and yet suggesting that they still have their
own coherence.
       Figure 23 is a graph of hashtags from the Libyan
revolution. Similar to the Egyptian revolution, the roughly
360,000 tweets we gathered from February 20 to May 17
contained 4,433 distinct hashtags. As in Egypt, there were
two major communities in this graph: one where the largest
node was #libya and one where it was #gaddafi. Like Egypt,
Libya has its own “other countries” community (Figure 24),
which was the third-largest in that captaset. The #egypt
and #tunisia nodes are about 6% of the size of the main
nodes (#gaddafi and #libya). It has a reciprocal link to
the events in Egypt.
       Putting these two sets of tweets together in Figure
25 reproduces this structure, even if it does strain the
galaxy metaphor somewhat. The “other countries” communities
connect the two global events. In both galaxies, the major
communities’ homogeneity remains, as do the secondary
communities (“Mubarak” and “Gaddafi”). Their connections
also remain proportional. We can at least partially
quantify the relationships between events, something that
could be parsed over time, and thereby identify their
evolving relationships based on social media discourses.
The discourse connects these events, yet on the large scale
of Big Data (or Big Capta) analysis, their differences
remain clear.




166
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA




       The Louvain method is an iterative algorithm: it looks
for communities among nodes, then looks for communities
in those communities, and then looks for communities in
those communities of communities, and so on. What we see in
Figure 25 is the broadest scale of communities. The smaller
communities (the “dictator” communities in each galaxy)
maintain their identity if we stop a step or two earlier.
Network theory helps us discover and discuss the polyvalent
nature of events: events are comprised of groups of actors
performing actions, which coalesce on many levels into
larger groups of actions that we also call events. Each
individual user maintains his or her identity, but they
also form larger structures by participating in events,
which themselves are parts of larger events. In essence,
every actor and idea is a thread, and when many threads
merge together, they become an event. These events can be
linked yet differentiated based on their discourse.


   The database of tweets thus represents a geographically
(TP)

and temporally organized archive of utterances which can be
read, analyzed, and visualized in multiple ways:

First, in their singularity, the flash of the human voice,
the singular utterance at a given moment in time and space.

Second, synchronically, as the voices, sentiments, or expressions
of a single day, or perhaps in a single hour or minute.

Third, diachronically, as change over time, which can be consid-
ered by following a single person tweeting over many hours, days,
or weeks, or structural trends and patterns emerging over time.

Fourth, as the aggregation and visualization of all the data in




167
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



the database captured by the application. In every case, the
archive is “less” than the event and functions primarily as a
possible but always incomplete documentation of the past
through the contingency of the present.
      But there is something else that can be found in the
“zoomed out” approach to analyzing the archive, namely the
openness to the future and the identification of points of in-
flection or tipping points that might indicate something
about future possibilities. As Charles Péguy writes: “Events
have critical points just as temperature has critical points—
points of fusion, congelation, boiling, condensation, coagula-
tion, and crystallization. And even within the event there are
states of surfeit which are precipitated, crystallized, and de-
termined by the introduction of a fragment of the future
event” (quoted in Deleuze, 53). Such points of inflection or
states of surfeit cannot “predict” the future or manifest the
future in any concrete or particular way; they merely intro-
duce, in Péguy’s elegant words, a fragment of the future event.
      Our Egypt dataset is not quite large enough, not quite
accurate enough (given that we cannot verify geographic lo-
cations provided by users), and not quite complete enough to
definitively detect such inflection or tipping points. Never-
theless, we wanted to know: might there be some discernible
statistical differences in the hours leading up to February 11
at 6PM, the hour Mubarak delivers his resignation speech?
Might more (or less) people be tweeting on these days than
in all previous days? Might there be a change in frequency in
which people tweeted? Might we be able to extract topics
from the tweets and see if certain keywords or topics (such as
violence or fear) were becoming more intense over the peri-
od of the revolution? In other words, could we detect any sta-
tistical differences in the social media data that might give an
indication that the revolution was reaching some kind of in-




168
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



flection point? The ramifications were genuinely exciting but
also deeply sobering: massive social media datasets could be
aggregated and studied to track the course of events that
were in the process of unfolding and whose future remained
unknown, but who is to say such statistical processing won’t
be used to enforce a particular future or eliminate the open-
ness of the future to come?
      ( DS) While no one could predict (from the data) that

Mubarak would give his resignation speech at that hour,
on that day, we do see some changes on February 10 and
11 in comparison with all other days of the revolution,
something that might have prompted policy analysts to start
paying attention at this moment. Interest in the Egyptian
revolution among Twitter users swelled during those two days,
partially due to a number of events that turned the tide
in the protesters’ favor. Figure 26 shows that more tweets
were sent on February 10 and 11 than on any other day we
captured during the revolution. February 11 was the day the
most tweets were sent, with the highest number and greatest
frequency within the hours leading up to and following
Mubarak’s resignation.
      On Twitter, these intensifications frequently came
through retweets of particular—messages that form a
significant portion of our archive (between 40-50%) on
these two days. One significant tipping point during those
two days was the Egyptian Army’s decision to join the
protesters. Several officers defected on February 10; from
10 AM to 12 PM, the most-retweeted tweet was “@arwasm: 3
army officers give up their ranks and join the protesters.
One says ‘My oath was to #Egypt, not to a person.’ #jan25
#tahrir.” Retweets of this tweet made up about 10% of the
tweets sent during those two hours. Midway through the day,
the Army stopped opposing the protesters (“RT @bencnn: From




169
                    HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



(26) Capta-set      Communiques 1 and 2, it’s clear the Army is confused. This
of tweets by day.
                    is getting muddled beyond words. #Egypt #Tahrir #Jan25”;
                    “RT @NadiaE: Army not threatening thousands gathered at
                    presidential palace. If this continues they have my respect
                    for that #jan25 #egypt”; “RT @occupiedcairo: Army not doing
                    anything to prevent ppl accessing TV building. All peaceful
                    so far #jan25”). Midafternoon, the Army signaled sympathy
                    with the protest movement: “RT @justimage: Army general on
                    other side crying and shaking hands with protesters. #jan25”;
                    “RT @justimage: All soldiers on other side of fencing at tv
                    bldg look sympathetic to protesters. Very emotional scene.
                    #jan25.” The military’s shifting loyalty could not help
                    but be felt on Twitter. Well into early February 10, tweets
                    blamed the Army for human rights violations, but as the Army
                    made its new position known over that day, tweets expressed
                    support for the Army. The volume of messages about this shift
                    reflects how much of a tipping point this event signaled.
                           While each tweet or retweet is one individual user’s
                    speech act, it forms part of a community discourse, a
                    complex network of speech acts. The large event,—the




                    170
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



Egyptian revolution,—consists of many smaller event threads
and many individual experiences condensed through tweets.
With visualization software to extract a global view of the
network over time, we begin to detect event rhythms and even
inflection points. If we view the Egyptian revolution as a
network of people, actions, and ideas, we can simultaneously
interrogate the revolution at a macro-scale and the many
individuals’ experiences as micro-threads that coalesce into
and recursively affect the course of events, thereby giving
rise to the possibility of a global public sphere of ever
thicker (and ever more fragile) networks of participants,
witnesses, and listeners.




Japan: Real-Time, Real-Space Disaster Relief
from 5,000+ Miles Away
          “Something terrible has just happened in Japan.”
      ( YK)

Such was the message from my mother-in-law that I
awoke to on the morning of March 11, 2011. Having
friends and family in Japan, but living in Los Angeles for
the past 15 years, I dread to hear such words—like many
of us who live in countries foreign to our own. Turning on
the television and browsing the web soon revealed that
one of the worst catastrophes in our generation had just
occurred in my home country, now more than 5,000 miles
away. As the day unfolded, so did the horrors of entire
communities being washed away by the unfathomably
powerful waves. Calling back home had mixed results:
while those far from the immediate impact zone of Sendai
were able to respond, those living in Tokyo were not. It
was to be another excruciating 24 hours before I was
finally able to confirm the safety of all my friends and




171
                      HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



                      family in Japan. But it took less than those 24 hours for
                      me to hastily submit my resume to a technology volunteer
                      agency called GIS Corps and be recruited and assigned
                      as the GIS Lead for CrisisCommons, an organization that
                      coordinates volunteers in crisis situations. CrisisCommons
                      had just started their Japan mission, and I joined hundreds
                      of technology volunteers from around the world, each and
                      every one of us working selflessly toward the relief efforts.
                      For the next 10 days, we—an international collection
                      of faceless, motivated, and talented technologists—
                      poured our hearts into gathering data, conducting spatial
                      analyses, and contributing to the relief efforts from afar.85



                      The Role of Social Media




                                A full day after the earthquake struck, @Chaa_aa-
                             ( YK)

                      ki’s plea for help was seen on Twitter. It came from a wom-
                      an trying to save her uncle, trapped on the second floor of
                      his house that was located in a flood zone caused by the
                      tsunami in Ishinomaki City. She added the hashtag #j_j_
                      helpme, which was designated to be used by people seek-
                      ing help in the aftermath of the earthquake. Her plea for
http://giscorps.org
http://crisis         help was retweeted, over and over again. She even left an
commons.org           address that would allow relief workers to find her uncle.




                      172
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



Looking at the location on a map, sure
enough, we find out that her uncle’s
house was just a few hundred meters
from the shore, one among thousands
of homes inundated by the tsunami.
      While I do not know if this particu-
lar tweet actually mobilized relief agen-
cies to save her uncle, Twitter—as a
platform—was an important conduit
for real-time, real-space information
dissemination, used by both the gener-
al public and disaster relief agencies.
Following the earthquake in Haiti in
2010, tweets became part of the data
harvested by Ushahidi, a crowd-
sourced visualization and mapping
platform used to collect and coordi-
nate information using multiple chan-
nels, including SMS, email, Twitter, and
the web. This was taken to a new level
in Japan, as the social fabric of the na-
tion quickly revolved around the usage
of Twitter as the primary mode of com-
munication for requesting medical aid,
seeking information about missing
people, sending encouragement, and
reporting damage and transportation
infrastructure statuses. In fact, more
than 80% of the 20,000 incident re-
ports collected by Sinsai.info, the Ush-
ahidi instance for the Japan disaster,
came from Twitter. Over the next 30
days, more than 700 million tweets




173
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



were sent. It is no longer a question of whether or not so-
cial media can be used in disaster situations, but rather a
question of how they can influence actions and simultane-
ously document what is happening from a nearly infinite
multiplicity of perspectives and locales.
      Two days after her initial tweet, a follow up message
from @Chaa_aaki appeared on Twitter:




The Retweet

           Part of the intrigue and power of the social web
       ( YK)

lies in its ability to transmit data through a multitude of
networks that grow exponentially the more “popular” the
information is. In Twitter, this is accomplished by means of
retweeting (or RT) capabilities: the simple operation of
sharing a tweet with others in your network and, subse-
quently, enabling people within your network to retweet it




174
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



to their own networks until a tweet
reaches a massive audience, some-
times in a matter of hours. In the case
of the tweets related to the earth-
quake, retweets were used effectively
to broadcast infrastructure damage,
post missing person notices, and even
announce relevant hashtags.
      @NamicoAoto’s tweet was
retweeted more than 17,000 times.
While most tweets were informational
in nature, the most “popular” tweet
was about courage and sacrifice. This
ideal of sacrifice resonated deeply
during trying times, even prompting
Prime Minister Naoto Kan to proclaim
to the volunteers, “You are the only
ones who can resolve a crisis. Retreat
is unthinkable.” The international media
called them the “Fukushima 50,” he-
roes who volunteered to stay behind at
the crippled Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear
plant in order to prevent a meltdown in
Japan.86 Locally, however, the complex-
ity that surrounded this “man-made”
disaster caused many to refrain from
celebrating and lauding these men. He-
roes or not, it would not be until Octo-
ber of 2012, a full 18 months later, be-
fore the next Prime Minister Yoshihiko
Noda finally honored and thanked
them for “saving Japan.”87




175
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



A Zoomed Out View of Twitter Data From Japan
      ( YK) Kawano and Shepard developed several web-

based visualizations that seek to expose spatial, temporal,
and lexical patterns that are otherwise dormant in the vast
amounts of data captured in millions of tweets. These visu-
alizations reveal real-time patterns through synoptic views of
the data that are not perceivable in the linear and ephemeral
feeds coming from the Twitter website interfaces. At the
same time, the team used the perspectives and patterns of
the data in aggregate to “zoom in” to particular individuals
and follow individual stories unfolding.
      UCLA’s Japan Twitter archive was collected over a 35
day period, from March 9 to April 13, 2011, via a “cron
job”88 that queried Twitter’s search API every 3 minutes, col-
lecting tweets based on a location parameter (Japan) and at
least one relevant hashtag (#earthquake, #sendai, #jishin,
#tsunami, #eqjp, #pray4japan, #japan, #j_j_helpme, #hinan,
#anpi, #daijyoubu, #311care). The tweets were subsequent-
ly saved in a database on a server at UCLA. While the ar-
chive has close to 700,000 records, it is a small—but fo-
cused—portion of the supposed 700 million total tweets
sent during the same time period. Here’s a look at the raw
numbers:

689,054       total number of tweets collected

236,520       distinct users, with 2.9 average number of tweets
              per user during this 35-day period

573,841       (83%) retweets (with the word “RT” in the text)

199,741       (29%) distinct tweets (some of which are also
              retweets or duplicates with slight variations)




176
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA




@aroe_s, who has a Twitter space ded-
icated to information regarding earth-
quakes in Japan, tweeted more than
2,500 times during this time period (by
far the most prolific user). The highest
number of tweets per hour comes
about a month after the earthquake:
April 7 at 11:32pm. This is assuredly
due to the occurrence of the second
largest aftershock that shook Japan at
magnitude 7.1 (there was actually a 7.9
earthquake that followed 30 minutes
after the main 9.0 earthquake on
March 11).

Sentiment Analysis
      ( YK) One aspect of social media is

that its ephemeral nature can provide a
snapshot of a moment’s mood, reflect-
ed—in aggregate—by the content of
what people are tweeting about in real
time. The rise and fall of different emo-
tions are a function of the many events
that transpired in the aftermath: the
evolving story around the nuclear melt-
down and radiation contamination, the
timing of the many devastating after-
shocks, the increasing death toll, and
the futility of finding survivors all con-
tributed to the nation’s psyche. In or-
der to analyze the emotional and psy-
chological state of the nation in the




177
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



days after the disaster, the archive was divided into 35
separate “day” text files. To measure day-by-day fluctua-
tions of emotions, a methodology that takes more than
2,000 of the most “emotional” words in the Japanese lan-
guage (as defined by the “Emotion Expression Dictio-
nary”89) was matched against each of the “day” files to
gauge the emotional content.90 The dictionary classifies
these words into ten meta-categories: weariness, happi-
ness, restlessness, sadness, fondness, fear, anger, peace-
fulness, surprise, and shame. By aggregating the match
rate per day, Twitter’s data is transposed into a flow of
emotions along a temporal pathway.91
       So what was the country “feeling” after the earth-
quake? Was it engulfed in sorrow? Anger? Fear? What ef-
fect did the hundreds of aftershocks have on the popu-
lace? Creating a universe represented by two object
types—days (in black) and words (colored by emotion cat-
egories)—one can see the gravitational pull for the more
“central” days and words. (Fig. 27) Unlike the multiple cen-
tralities that exist in the previous Egyptian universe, this
one has a singular core, dominated by objects that orbit
around a single, focused event. Words are sized by how
often they were spoken, and their correlation to the differ-
ent days is represented by lines that are also sized accord-
ing to the usage per day. Communities are created by
clusters of words, which are mentioned in proximity to
each other. The two largest clusters are represented by
the words 涙 (tears) and 誇り(proud), which have formed a
giant galaxy around March 14 and 15. This reflects the
content from @NamicoAoto’s single tweet (that was con-
sequently retweeted more than 17,000 times) and embod-
ies the nation’s anxious sentiments, days after the earth-
quake, expressing pride and sadness in the same context.




178
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA



The next largest cluster is formed by
the word心配 (worry), a sentiment that
is classified as “fearful,” and is marked
by its presence following the two larg-
est earthquakes, on March 11 and April
7. The final cluster community revolves
around March 13, two days after the
earthquake, showing strong connec-
tions between the words 悲しみ (sad-
ness), 恐怖 (scared),不安 (anxious), 愛情
(love), and 傷(pain).
      But what about replaying these
emotions over time? The charts in fig-
ures 28/29 reflect the 10 emotion cate-
gories over the 35 day period. Looking
at the top chart, many of the senti-
ments are dormant during the first cou-
ple of days, but collectively explode
shortly after. Perhaps this is because
the initial “shock” of the event prompt-
ed content that was largely informa-
tional in nature. “Happy,” “sad,” and
“restless” sentiments each peak three
days later, on March 14 (“happy” peaks
here because the word “pride,” from @
NamicoAoto’s tweet, is classified in it).
But “fear” does not reach its high point
until April 8, the day after the second
largest aftershock. The country experi-
enced many earthquakes over the
course of the month, averaging more
than ten earthquakes a day. However,
the number of earthquakes had tapered




179
                   HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities



(27) Network
diagram showing
emotion keywords
that were
prevalent after
the earthquake.




                   180
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA




181
HyperCities: Thick Mapping in the Digital Humanities




off considerably over time, perhaps explaining why the April 7
earthquake rekindled and renewed much of the fear in a na-
tion that may have just started to begin its healing process.
      While this chart effectively communicates the sheer
quantity of emotional content, it does not reveal the distribu-
tion of the 10 emotions on a day-by-day basis and gives a
false impression that the nation had no emotions between
March 23 and April 7. To be sure, there was—measured in
absolute numbers—significantly less emotional content in the
Twitter archive during this period than in the days immediately




182
MAPPING EVENTS / MAPPING SOCIAL MEDIA




                                                                (28) Emotions
                                                                charted over time.


following the earthquake and tsunami. As such, the chart be-
low was generated to better expose the significant differenc-
es between each emotion group, regardless of the total
tweet count, as values were normalized and scaled to 100%.
One can see that “fear” is a dominant sentiment throughout
and “weariness” lingers and escalates with time. Both are
expressions that bespeak an exhausted population dealing
with the uncertainty of the on-going aftershocks and, at the
time, the unbounded and uncontrolled nuclear catastrophe.




                                                                (29) Emotions
                                                                as relative percent-
                                                                ages over time.




183
G
1


A journey through
Tohoku, Japan
 “That building is on its side,” I      He came to watch our team’s pre-
thought to myself in disbelief as I     sentation on “Social Media and
visited the city of Onagawa in To-      GIS: Mapping Revolutions, Histo-
hoku, Japan. Living abroad gave         ry, and Catastrophe” where I spoke
me the opportunity to analyze the       about the role that social media
“big” picture, taking a macro-level     played in the days following the
approach and applying computa-          earthquake. Yugo is a physician, an
tional analysis on a large, even ab-    expert in clinical epidemiology,
stracted and high-altitude scale.       and currently teaches at Niigata
But now I was on the ground,            University. He is also a GIS practi-
walking among the ruins. While it       tioner, fluent in using spatial anal-
is not possible to turn back the        ysis to provide insights on how
clock and experience the disaster       physical space is directly correlated
as an eyewitness, it is possible to     with the outbreak, diffusion, and
mobilize and immerse oneself into       control of various epidemics. We
the physical spaces that still define   bonded immediately over mutual
the specter of the event.               excitements like temporal mapping
      I first met Yugo Shobugawa at     and spatial regressions. But I think
Harvard University in May 2011.         the real connection happened




         184
WINDOWS
GALLERY




when we both acknowledged our           the town of Banda Aceh, Indonesia,
feelings of despair and helplessness    shortly after the Indian Ocean Tsu-
of being Japanese, and yet not be-      nami in 2004. This trip left a huge
ing in Japan during the earth-          imprint, witnessing an entire com-
quake. For many Japanese nation-        munity in ruins, standing on
als living abroad, experiencing the     ground zero where more than
earthquake from a distance was          100,000 people died, rendered
excruciating. It is this sense of de-   speechless and heartbroken. With
spair that drove many of us to          much trepidation, I understood that
pour our hearts and souls into the      going to Sendai would bring similar
recovery effort remotely.               sentiments in some ways, but pro-
       When I finally had the oppor-    foundly different ones in others,
tunity to return to Japan, on two       given my deep cultural and spiritual
separate occasions—once in De-          bond with the country. I called
cember of 2011 and again in July of     Yugo, and together we took several
2012—I decided that I had to see        trips to the disaster-struck areas.
the effects of the disaster with my
own eyes. I had seen a similar ca-
tastrophe in the past, having visited




185
G
2


Yuriage
Elementary School
A missing baby poster is about the     just turned one. The boy’s cheeks
saddest thing that can greet you,      were flush, and he had a full head
but this was exactly what I saw af-    of straight black hair. His face was
fixed to the entrance to the Yuriage   round, and he smiled with his
Elementary School gymnasium.           mouth open, looking straight at the
The piece of paper, attached with      camera, looking straight at me. I
five pieces of tape, already had       stood there silently, transfixed by
signs of wear and tear, as my visit    the image of the smiling boy sport-
was a full 9 months after the earth-   ing the popular shimajiro tiger bib.
quake. The poster looked some-         Many months later, I found out
thing like what you see below.         that the father had lost four mem-
The photo on the poster reminded       bers of his immediate family and
me of my own baby boy who had          was still searching for his baby boy.




                    Looking for
                 8-month-old baby
                Height: about 70cm
                 Weight: about 9kg
               Bottom set of teeth just
                    coming out


         186
WINDOWS
GALLERY




      Beyond the door, I came to          and labeled by location, date,
the “Fuji Film Salvation Photo            names, and whatever else could be
Project,” a volunteer effort to collect   extracted during the recovery pro-
and recover “memories” from the           cess. The memories of the past
disaster zone, and to carefully orga-     from so many distant locations had
nize and exhibit them in hopes that       been gathered together in this one
family and friends could retrieve         place. Sometimes, it was all that
them. The room was filled with box        remained of families, evidence that
after box and crate after crate of        they had existed, that they had
photographs, diaries, scrapbooks,         lived. These photographs—un-
and personal effects. It was the          claimed—were all that was left.
physical archive, on paper and in
photographs. Items were tagged




187
188
G
3


Christmas at Okawa
Elementary School
When we visited Okawa Elementa-        the bank of a river and a small hill
ry School on December 20, 2011, it     on its backside.
was a dreary, overcast day, with             According to our local guide,
snowflakes falling from the sky in     Satoshi Mimura, a medical officer
a slow swirling motion. Of the 108     in Japan’s Ground Self Defense
children in attendance, 74 were        Force and current PhD student at
lost due to the tsunami that swept     Tohoku University, the earthquake
through the school and much of         manual for the school dictated that
Ishinomaki City. The day of the        the children evacuate the building
earthquake supposedly had similar      and congregate in the open area
weather, with temperatures hover-      outside the building. This is the
ing around freezing levels. As I       area that is sandwiched by the riv-
took out my camera, I could hardly     er and the hill. The school teachers
keep my hands on the shutter, as       kept the children in this play-
the cold wind cut deep into my         ground, instructing them to await
exposed fingers. Empty spaces that     their parents who were on their
showed remnants of the disaster        way to pick them up. Some parents
surrounded the entire school:          did show up, taking their children
squashed cars swept away and left      with them. They were among the
abandoned in the middle of rice        few who survived. Shortly after, the
paddies, mounds and mounds of          first warnings of the tsunami came.
stacked debris, an occasional emp-     After much debate, the instructors
ty house that miraculously sur-        chose to march the children to-
vived the waves, bulldozers con-       ward higher ground, but made a
tinuing the cleanup effort, smoke      tragic error in judgment by decid-
rising from place to place signaling   ing to head toward a nearby
the burning of collected trash. The    bridge, where they were met head
school itself was wedged between       on by the dark, powerful waves.




189
G
3




Four of the children, along with one         What is left standing in Okawa
of the teachers ran toward the hills   Elementary School is the shell of the
in the opposite direction, reaching    main campus, a brick building
higher ground, clinging onto trees     whose main circular structure has
and most likely watching helplessly    remained intact. In front of the
as their less fortunate classmates     structure is a memorial, adorned
were swallowed up by the waves.        today with fresh flowers, toys,
Those who survived had to endure       stuffed animals, fresh fruit, drinks,
freezing temperatures overnight        and funerary plaques. In front of the
before finally being rescued from      memorial are two poster boards.
the hill the following day.            The first one reads:



                 Please look after us
                        Fathers
                       Mothers
            Little by little, little by little,
               We will move forward.




         190
GALLERY
WINDOWS




This is when I noticed the solar pan-
els located next to the memorial.
These panels were powering the illu-
mination for the Christmas tree that
stood in the exposed wall behind it.
A translation of the second poster
appears below:




                  The two of you had always wanted to go to the
                            Sendai Illumination Pageant.
         I am so sorry, I guess I will never be able to take you after all.
       Every year you had said “let’s go!” If I had known this was going
         to happen, I should have made the time and taken you there.
                 But isn’t the illumination from the Christmas tree
                       the volunteers put together beautiful?
        It is called “Okawa Elementary School’s Illumination Pageant.”
                                   Isn’t it wonderful?
                      Do enjoy it with your friends in Heaven.
                                      Your mother.




191
WINDOWS
G
4


Inside the nuclear
evacuation zone
My second visit to the Tohoku re-      public outcry and the media frenzy
gion came in the summer of 2012.       that followed the ill-fated Fukushi-
This time, I would be joining Yugo     ma Nuclear Plant has put a spot-
and his colleagues to venture in-      light on this location, serving as a
side the 20km nuclear evacuation       reminder to the world of what a
zone, a place where more than          deadly confluence of natural disas-
170,000 people had been forced to      ters and human incompetence can
evacuate following the declaration     do. According to a recent 600 page
of a nuclear emergency by the gov-     report 92 conducted by Kiyoshi
ernment at 7:03 PM on March 11.        Kurokawa, a Tokyo University Pro-
      As the days counted down         fessor, on the causes of the nuclear
toward my visit to the barricaded      catastrophe, he concludes:
areas, I began to wonder: what
would it be like to physically enter        What must be admitted—
a place where only a tiny handful           very painfully—is that this
of people on this planet have been          was a disaster “Made in Japan”
allowed to visit since 3/11/11? The




193
G
5


July 17, 2012
My day began early in the morning               I soon met up with Yugo and
as I hopped on the 7am “Max” bul-         was introduced to his many col-
let train from Tokyo station to Ni-       leagues. Yugo leads a team of re-
igata. Upon my arrival, I took a cab      searchers, working in International
to Niigata University Hospital            and Public Health. He then took
where Yugo works as a medical             me to another wing on campus
researcher.                               called the Radioisotope Center,
      I got off at the in-patient lobby   where he introduced me to the
of the hospital, a place I later          Bishamon team.
learned had received hundreds of                I am a member of the
patients from Fukushima shortly           Bishamon team, through a partner-
after 3/11, some of whom died             ship between Niigata University
shortly after they arrived. Following     and UCLA. Our GIS and Visualiza-
the earthquake, many hospitals            tion team (that consists of David
were overburdened and doctors             Shepard and myself) at UCLA’s In-
were short in demand, and so, even        stitute for Digital Research and Edu-
this hospital, located 4 hours (170       cation has provided a web visualiza-
miles) from the Fukushima Nuclear         tion strategy for the information
Plant, received an influx of patients.    being collected by the Niigata team.




         194
WINDOWS
GALLERY



http://bishamon.org




While the Bishamon Niigata team         izes in epidemic diseases. Jun Goto,
gathers data on the ground, the         who never stops smiling, is a nucle-
Bishamon UCLA team processes            ar physicist who I soon realized
and loads the data into a cus-          was the genius behind the many
tom-built web application that pro-     devices concocted for the project.
vides the information to the public.    Makoto Naito is a doctor specializ-
       Bishamon is comprised of a       ing in pathology and the current
group of sixteen academic volun-        director of the Radioisotope Cen-
teers, each an expert in their re-      ter, and I should mention, the char-
spective fields: radiology, nuclear     ismatic leader of this band of vol-
physics, nursing, virology, commu-      unteer researchers. Makoto is the
nity medicine, pharmacology, bio-       heart and soul of the team, not only
chemistry, public health, and infor-    because he serves as the project
mation technology. Most of us had       director, but more so because he is
never met each other before the         from Minamisoma, the largest city
disaster. On this day, four of us       that falls within the evacuation
were to embark on a road trip to        zone, symbolizing the roots and
visit several cities that fall within   wings that are at the core of much
the evacuation zone. Yugo special-      of the work conducted by the team.




195
G
5




      So what exactly is Bishamon?       standing that this is a long-term
While it serves as the name and          project, and that measurements
identity of the research team, it        need to be made, possibly over and
refers to the device that Jun has        beyond the life of an entire genera-
put together that measures air-          tion, to accurately understand the
borne radiation levels through a         effects that the nuclear crisis has
mobile and vehicle mounted sen-          had upon the populace it affected.
sor. Simply put, it combines a do-             The project itself has a simple
simeter, which measures radiation,       mission: to empower local govern-
a GPS, for position and altitude,        ments to measure remnants of ra-
and a laptop, which houses a cus-        diation within their communities
tom built application that com-          and to inform the residents and
piles, stores, and visualizes the data   the general public of existing levels
streaming from the multiple devic-       of radiation near and around their
es. What makes Bishamon unique           homes. While other projects may
is the relentless pursuit of accuracy    not have the capacity to measure
and consistency. The team believes       over an extended period of time,
in a single measuring protocol that      Bishamon plans to be around for a
can be replicated for years to come,     while. The transfer of technology
if not decades into the future. This     from research universities to local
approach comes with the under-           governments is at the core of the




         196
WINDOWS
GALLERY




project’s objectives. For local gov-    to the international community.
ernments, having the capacity and       The “openness” of the data remains
the procedural know-how to mea-         an important, long term goal of the
sure radiation on their own is im-      team. Given the unprecedented
perative to conduct targeted and        nature of the disaster, it is impera-
prioritized decontamination ef-         tive for the world to know what has
forts that can accelerate the pro-      and continues to transpire in
cess of healing and ultimately al-      Fukushima.
low residents to come home. For               And so it was on the day of
the residents, this information can     July 17 that the four of us took off
serve as a reality check and a factor   from Niigata University heading
for making informed decisions.          toward the Fukushima Nuclear
While the demand for this infor-        Zone. While this marked my first
mation has accelerated, little (to      physical encounter with the
date) has been done by the federal      Bishamon device and the first time
government to make the data             I was part of this drive toward
available to the public in a timely     Fukushima, it was one of more
fashion. In this regard, the            than 25 such trips that the core
Bishamon team intends to provide        members of the Niigata team had
full transparency and access to all     taken since the summer before, an
the data collected, both locally and    almost biweekly excursion.




197
G
6


July 18, 2012
Spending the night in Iwaki, just       ten code of solidarity between
south of the nuclear zone, we woke      the team and the people who had
up early and had breakfast at our       been evacuated from this region.
hotel. One thing that caught my         We proceeded to enter from the
attention was the rice. There were      south, heading north from Iwaki.
two options: Fukushima rice and         The entrance was heavily barricad-
Akita rice, perhaps, to give guests a   ed, and I was surprised to see the
choice between a possibly “con-         large contingent of security officers
taminated” local Fukushima brand        present.
and another option that was surely            Once inside, it literally felt
“safe.” It symbolized the existing      like we were in a bubble, a time
sensitivity toward the nuclear          capsule that had descended upon
situation.                              this entire land, filled with crum-
      After consuming the local         pled buildings, overgrown shrub-
Fukushima rice for breakfast, we        bery, and debris that had been left
took off to enter the Nuclear Zone.     untouched since March 11, 2011.
We put on our radiation protective      While there was some traffic on
suits, an act that condensed the        the road (military, police, decon-
gravity of the moment and also          tamination workers), there was
seemed to forge a sort of unwrit-       not a single soul occupying any
WINDOWS
GALLERY




of the residential or commercial         producing an audible beep every
structures around. This space was        second that a new reading was
simply devoid of any real signs of       recorded. We silently stared at the
life. In the eerie quiet, I was struck   charts and maps being generated
by how incredibly beautiful the          on the computer screen as we
landscape was inside. Unlike urban       approached the nuclear pow-
Japan, this region was representa-       er plant. 2 … 10 … 15 … 20 …
tive of the nature that abounds in       micro-sieverts per hour, readings
rural Japan, with gently winding         that were deemed way above any
roads, small bridges, fog clinging       safety guidelines by any standards.
to the mountains, a myriad of            We came to within 2km of the
rivers, an agricultural landscape        nuclear plant before veering off
dominated by rice fields, and a          toward the ocean, headed toward
blend of traditional and modern          Ukedo Elementary School. As we
Japanese architecture.                   approached the ocean, we noticed
       Beep, beep, beep. All along,      cars, boats, and all sorts of debris
Jun had the Bishamon device              strewn across the landscape, many
turned on inside our vehicle. The        as far as a few miles inland.
real-time monitoring system
was measuring radiation levels,
G
7


Ukedo Elementary School




Today, Namie City is a city that      make-shift office in Nihonmatsu
effectively no longer exists. All     City. They kindly accompanied
21,000 residents were forced to       and guided us through what was
evacuate shortly after the nuclear    left of their city, which is almost
meltdown, and none has been able      entirely contained within the evac-
to return. Satoru Shirato, Hideyuki   uation zone. Our first stop was at
Matsumoto, and Michiko Taka-          Ukedo Elementary School.
hashi are government employees              3:38pm. “That is odd,” I
for the City of Namie working in a    thought, as I noticed that every




         200
GALLERY
WINDOWS




clock in every classroom had          room we entered reflected this fact
stopped at exactly 3:38pm. And        (which also demonstrates the Japa-
then it hit me. The earthquake        nese accuracy in synchronizing
happened at 2:46 pm. However, I       their clocks). Each classroom also
soon realized that the clocks did     had blackboards that showed the
not power off because of the earth-   un-erased date (3/11) and messag-
quake, but rather, by the tsunami     es of encouragement left by the
waves that had pounded the facili-    relief workers.
ties 52 minutes later. Every class-         The school grounds are locat-




201
W
G
1
7




ed just a few hundred meters from       nearby evacuation shelters.
the shore, and the facilities evi-             I acquired multiple perspec-
denced the staggering devastation       tives during this tragedy that con-
left behind by both the earthquake      nect me to the many people, places,
and the tsunami. As I entered the       temporalities, and mediations of
gymnasium, I almost fell … and          this singular event, first as a specta-
noticed that the floor had caved in,    tor from the outside working fever-
exposing the raw construction ma-       ishly with those inside, and then as
terials like spikes on the floor. The   a witness from the inside who
banner inside the gym read: “Con-       could leave and return to my out-
gratulations, new graduates.” Ac-       side. The event has many lives and
cording to Mr. Matsumoto it had         afterlives through haunting absenc-
been a festive mood on the morn-        es, stranded memories, and empty
ing of March 11, where rehearsals       landscapes. I find myself moving
for graduation ceremonies were          between the gaps: assuming a top-
being held in the gym. Fortunately,     down view of collecting and gath-
there were no student casualties at     ering digital data, applying compu-
Ukedo Elementary School, unlike         tational algorithms in an attempt to
the tragedy that befell Okawa Ele-      understand an objective “whole,”
mentary School. According to him,       and the intensely personal, subjec-
upon hearing the tsunami warn-          tive, and emotional attachment one
ings, instructors commanded the         acquires by “being there.”
student body to evacuate to the                Back in Los Angeles, I contin-
nearby mountains, where a major         ue to listen: analyzing, mapping,
road (Highway 6) lay on the other       and visualizing the data from the
side. This was about a 2.5 km trek,     beep, beep, beep, while my col-
and many of the students were           leagues return, time and again, to
then picked up by passing trucks,       the nuclear evacuation zone.
where they were transported to          Yoh Kawano




         202
We follow the story of a single eye-
witness, Tranquil Dragon, through
the streets of Sendai in the days,
weeks, and months after the disaster.

 What happens to the memories of
the children from Okawa elementary
school, of the baby gone missing, and
the lives salvaged, however hastily
and momentarily, in the crates of
photographs and boxes of paper?

The event remains.

It is still possible to bear witness for
the witnesses.
Endnotes                                         7  http://www.artcom.de/en/projects/
                                                    project/detail/the-invisible-shape-of-
                                                    things-past/.
1   Walter Benjamin, The Arcades Project,        8 Walter Benjamin, “The Work of Art in the
    trans. Howard Eiland and Kevin Mc-              Age of Mechanical Reproduction,” in:
    Laughlin (Cambridge: Harvard University         Illuminations, trans. Harry Zohn (New
    Press, 1999), 476 (translation slightly         York: Schocken Books 1968), 236.
    modified). The original German is: “Ges-     9 Michael Jones, “The Future of Local
    chichte zerfällt in Bilder, nicht in Ges-       Search—Google’s Strategic Vision,” Con-
    chichten.” Das Passagen-Werk, ed. Rolf          ference Talk at Where 2.0 (May 29, 2007).
    Tiedemann (Frankfurt am Main:                10 Cathy Davidson, “Humanities 2.0: Prom-
    Suhrkamp, 1983), 596.                           ise, Perils, Predictions,” in: PMLA 123.3
2    Theodor Nelson, “A File Structure              (2008): 707-17; Cathy Davidson and Da-
    for the Complex, the Changing, and              vid Theo Goldberg, The Future of Learning
    the Indeterminate” (1965), in: The New          Institutions (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2009).
    Media Reader, eds. Noah Wardrip-Fruin        11 For Twitter archives from Egypt, Libya,
    and Nick Montfort (Cambridge: MIT               and Japan, see, respectively: http://egypt.
    Press, 2003), 133-45.                           hypercities.com, http://libya.hypercities.
3   Norman J.W. Thrower, Maps and Civiliza-         com, and http://sendai.hypercities.com.
    tion (Chicago: University of Chicago         12 Theodore H. Nelson, Literary Machines:
    Press, 1972), 3.                                the report on, and of, Project Xanadu con-
4   David J. Bodenhamer, “The Potential of          cerning word processing, electronic publish-
    Spatial Humanities,” in: The Spatial Hu-        ing, hypertext, thinkertoys, tomorrow’s
    manities: GIS and the Future of Humanities      intellectual revolution, and certain other
    Scholarship, eds., David J. Bodenhamer,         topics including knowledge, education, and
    John Corrigan, and Trevor M. Harris             freedom (San Antonio, TX: T.H. Nelson,
    (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,         1987), 0/13.
    2010), 14-30. In practice, there is much     13 http://salt.unc.edu/T-RACES/.
    convergence between the notion of “thick     14 http://acl.arts.usyd.edu.au/harlem/.
    mapping” that we are describing here and     15 Edward Said, Culture and Imperialism
    Bodenhamer’s “deep maps” that embody            (New York: Vintage Books, 1994), 58.
    humanistic approaches to spatio-temporal     16 Restoring the term “culture” to its etymo-
    data marked by ambiguity, uncertainty,          logical roots of cultivating, tilling, and
    contingency, and incompleteness. See his        inhabiting, Casey argues that “we must,
    forthcoming edited volume: Deep Maps            finally, put culture back in place.” “How to
    and Spatial Narratives (Bloomington:            Get from Space to Place in a Fairly Short
    Indiana University Press, 2014).                Stretch of Time,” in: Senses of Place, eds.
5   Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism, or,             Steven Feld and Keith Basso (Santa Fe,
    the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism           New Mexico: School of American Re-
    (Durham: Duke University Press, 1992).          search Press, 1996), 34.
6   Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of       17 Walter Benjamin, “One Way Street,” in:
    Cultures (New York: Basic Books, 1973).         Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings,




            204
   Volume 1: 1913–1926, eds. Marcus Bullock           tripartite analysis of space as lived, per-
   and Michael Jennings, trans. Edmund                ceived, and represented that Lefebvre
   Jephcott (Cambridge: Harvard University            articulated in The Production of Space,
   Press, 1996), 444–48.                              trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith (Cam-
18 In his seminal book, The Image of the City         bridge: Blackwell, 1991).
   (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1970), Kevin             24 Walter Benjamin, “Berlin Childhood
   Lynch articulated the ways in which men-           Around 1900,” in: Walter Benjamin: Select-
   tal geographies (personal associations,            ed Writings, Volume 3: 1935-1938, ed. Mi-
   memories, desires) meld with and even              chael Jennings, trans. Howard Eiland
   structure the physical geographies of the          (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
   city.                                              2002), 387. Translation modified.
19 On the development of planimetric maps          25 Philip Ethington argues that “knowledge
   and the evolution of the bird’s eye per-           of the past . . . is literally cartographic: a
   spective, see J.B. Harley and David                mapping of the places of history indexed
   Woodward, eds., The History of Cartogra-           to the coordinates of spacetime,” in: “Plac-
   phy, six vols. (Chicago: University of Chi-        ing the Past: ‘Groundwork’ for a Spatial
   cago Press, 1987-92).                              Theory of History,” Rethinking History 11.4
20 David Wood argues that the history of              (2007): 465-93. Here, 466.
   cartography is inseparable from the histo-      26 Jules Michelet, Histoire de France
   ry of the nation-state in The Power of             (Paris: C. Marpon and E. Flammarion,
   Maps (New York: Guilford Press, 1992).             1879-1884), 2.
   For an overview of the history of “carto-       27 The theoretical claims made in this essay
   graphic reason,” see John Pickles, A Histo-        are developed extensively in: Philip J.
   ry of Spaces: Cartographic Reason, Map-            Ethington, “Placing the Past: ‘Ground-
   ping, and the Geo-Coded World (New York:           work’ for a Spatial Theory of History,”
   Routledge, 2004).                                  with responses by Thomas Bender,
21 I discuss this in more length in Mobile            David Carr, Edward Casey, Edward
   Modernity: Germans, Jews, Trains (New              Dimendberg, and Alun Munslow,
   York: Columbia University Press, 2007),            Rethinking History 11:4 (December 2007):
   58ff. The classic cultural and social history      463-530; Philip J. Ethington, “Sociovisual
   of the railway remains Wolfgang Schivel-           Perspective: Vision and the Forms of the
   busch, The Railway Journey (Berkeley:              Human Past,” in Barbara Stafford, ed., A
   University of California Press, 1977), who         Field Guide to a New Meta-Field: Bridging
   also describes the “annihilation” of space         the Humanities-Neurosciences Divide (Chi-
   and time.                                          cago: University of Chicago Press, 2011);
22 Walter Benjamin, “A Berlin Chronicle,” in:         and Philip J. Ethington and Nobuko
   Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings, Vol-           Toyosawa, “Inscribing the Past: Depth as
   ume 2: 1927-1934, eds. Michael Jennings,           Narrative in Historical Spacetime,” in
   Howard Eiland, and Gary Smith, trans.              David Bodenhamer, ed., Deep Mapping
   Edmund Jephcott (Cambridge: Harvard                and Spatial Narratives (Bloomington:
   University Press, 1999), 596.                      Indiana University Press, 2014).
23 Such a project begins to approach the           28 Denis Cosgrove, Apollo’s Eye: A Carto-




205
   graphic Genealogy of the Earth in the West-    38 It is not coincidental that the German
   ern Imagination (Baltimore: Johns Hop-            word for the sublime, Das Erhabene,
   kins University Press, 2001).                     comes from the verb erheben, meaning to
29 See the excellent overview by Benjamin            elevate or rise up. With regard to the plea-
   Lazier, “Earthrise; or, The Globalization of      sure of rising above the earth, Cosgrove
   the World Picture,” in: The American His-         explains: “Reverie is the closest English
   torical Review 116.3 (June 2011): 602-30.         translation of the Latin somnium, the
30 Martin Heidegger, “The Age of the World           sense of imaginative dreaming long asso-
   Picture,” in: The Question Concerning             ciated with rising over the earth” (3).
   Technology and Other Essays, trans.            39 Caren Kaplan, “Precision Targets: GPS
   William Lovitt (New York: Harper & Row,           and the Militarization of U.S. Consumer
   1977), 129.                                       Identity,” in American Quarterly, 58.3
31 Cf. Media Archaeology: Approaches, Appli-         (September 2006), 693-713. Here, 695.
   cations, and Implications, eds. Erkki          40 Lisa Parks, Culture in Orbit: Satellites and
   Huhtamo and Jussi Parikka (Berkeley:              the Televisual (Durham: Duke University
   University of California Press, 2011).            Press, 2005), 14.
32 Susan Sontag, Regarding the Pain of Oth-       41 For a discussion of the key satellites used
   ers (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux,        in remote sensing from 1960 through the
   2003), 110.                                       present, see the excellent overview by
33 Jorge Luis Borges, “On Exactitude in              Laura Kurgan, Close Up at a Distance:
   Science,” in: Collected Fictions, trans. An-      Mapping, Technology and Politics (New
   drew Hurley (New York: Penguin, 1999).            York: Zone Books, 2013), 39-54. Her book
34 Lev Manovich, The Language of New Me-             appeared just as we were finishing this
   dia (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001), 260ff.          book, and there are many parallels be-
   For a discussion of Shaw and Viola, see           tween HyperCities and the nine projects
   Mark B.N. Hansen, New Philosophy for              she discusses that make use of geospatial
   New Media (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2004).           technologies, satellite imagery, and GIS.
35 http://www.artcom.de/en/projects/              42 Patrick Crogan, “Gametime: History,
   project/detail/the-invisible-shape-of-            Narrative, and Temporality in Combat
   things-past/.                                     Flight Simulator 2,” in: The Video Game
36 Stephen Oettermann, The Panorama:                 Theory Reader, eds. Mark J.P. Wolf and
   History of a Mass Medium, trans. Deborah          Bernard Perron (New York: Routledge,
   Lucas Schneider (New York: Zone Books,            2003), 275-301. Here, 276.
   1997), 49.                                     43 Manovich, The Language of New Media, 278.
37 Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observ-      44 According to Google Earth statistics, most
   er: On Vision and Modernity in the Nine-          of the imagery is between one and three
   teenth Century (Cambridge: MIT Press,             years old and is periodically updated as
   1990), 1-2. Also, see the discussion by           higher resolution imagery becomes avail-
   Mark B.N. Hansen in New Philosophy for            able. Moreover, quite a number of militari-
   New Media, esp. chapter three, “The Auto-         ly sensitive regions of the earth, such as
   mation of Sight and the Bodily Basis of           the roof of the White House or a host of
   Vision.”                                          worldwide military bases and secret gov-




           206
   ernment buildings, are deliberately ob-        51 Established by the inventor of gmail, Paul
   scured or simply erased, something that,          Buchheit, Google’s informal corporate
   perhaps ironically, only draws more atten-        motto is “don’t be evil.”
   tion to these “empty” spaces.                  52 These words were written in his preface in
45 For a discussion of the “unknown world”           1988. Paul Virilio, War and Cinema: The
   in the history of cartography, see Alfred         Logistics of Perception. trans. Patrick Ca-
   Hiatt, “Blank Spaces on the Earth,”               miller (London: Verso 2000), 4.
   The Yale Journal of Criticism (2002):          53 Avi Bar-Zeev, “Notes on the Origin of
   15.2, 223-250.                                    Google Earth”: http://www.realityprime.
46 The Van Sant map cannot be reproduced             com/articles/notes-on-the-origin-of-
   in print but can be seen at this website,         google-earth.
   which proclaims it as “a milestone in car-     54 Keyhole corporate website, accessed via
   tographic history”: www.geosphere.com/            the Internet Archive Wayback Machine,
   imagery.html. For a trenchant analysis of         http://web.archive.org/web/
   this map and its ideology of visual purity,       20030721011001/http://keyhole.com/.
   see the discussion by Denis Wood, The          55 Conversation between John Hanke
   Power of Maps (New York: Guilford Press,          and David Shepard over Twitter Direct
   1992), 48-69. See also, the short discussion      Message.
   by John Pickles, A History of Spaces: Car-     56 http://www.gearthhacks.com and http://
   tographic Reason, Mapping, and the                googlesightseeing.com/.
   Geo-Coded World (New York: Routledge,          57 Mark Aubin, “Google Earth: From Space
   2004), 62.                                        to Your Face . . . and Beyond,” Google Li-
47 Google Earth shows the city’s built envi-         brarian Center Blog. Although no longer
   ronment (urbs) in virtual form, not the           available, the blog is cited by others.
   social and economic structures of the          58 Avi Bar-Zeev cites another inspiration for
   community (civitas). For a discussion of          Google Earth namely the “Earth” geo-
   this distinction, see Richard Kagan, Ur-          graphic information system in Neal Ste-
   ban Images of the Hispanic World, 1493-           phenson’s Snow Crash that the Central
   1793 (New Haven: Yale University Press,           Intelligence Corporation uses to tie sites
   2000).                                            in the Internet to the physical world
48 Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno:                (Bar-Zeev).
   Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans.             59 John Frick and Joel Headley, “Why does
   John Cumming (New York: Continuum,                Google maps use the inaccurate, ancient
   1993), 3.                                         and distorted Mercator Projection?—Goo-
49 The panoramic bubbles were introduced             gle Groups,” Google Earth Product Fo-
   in version 5 of Google Earth, but removed         rums: http://productforums.google.com/
   in subsequent versions.                           forum/#!topic/maps/A2ygEJ5eG-o, Au-
50 Bruce Sterling calls this an “internet of         gust 3, 2009. Last visited July 26, 2012.
   things,” in which data networks have           60 http://support.esri.com/en/knowledge-
   merged with physical objects in space.            base/GISDictionary/term/georeferencing.
   See his Shaping Things (Cambridge: MIT         61 Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of
   Press, 2005).                                     Cultures, 28-29.




207
62 Jerome McGann, Radiant Textuality:            70 Voices of January 25th: https://twitter.
   Literature after the World Wide Web (New         com/Jan25voices and Voices of February
   York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001), 117.            17th: https://twitter.com/feb17voices.
63 The following summary is based on re-         71 For a sobering account of the dialectical
   search undertaken by Nobuko Toyosawa,            underbelly of social media technologies,
   which she graciously shared with our             see, for example, Evgeny Morozov’s analy-
   research team during a NEH Summer                sis of the “dark side” of the Twitter revolu-
   Institute for Advanced Topics in Digital         tion, in which he shows how totalitarian
   Humanities focused on geospatial human-          regimes harness social media to track and
   ities scholarship (2012).                        detain dissidents: “Iran: Downside to the
64 The projects discussed by Laura Kurgan           ‘Twitter Revolution,’” Dissent (Fall 2009):
   in her book, Close Up at a Distance, use         56.4, 10-14, and The Net Delusion: The
   geotechnologies and critically explore           Dark Side of Internet Freedom (New York:
   spatial data and GIS systems—much like           Public Affairs, 2011).
   HyperCities—in order to “reclaim, repur-      72 Paul Virilio, “The Third Interval: A Criti-
   pose, and discover their inadvertent,            cal Transition,” in: Rethinking Technologies,
   sometimes critical, often propositional,         ed. Verena Conley (Minneapolis: Universi-
   uses” (17) and, thereby, “assess their full      ty of Minnesota Press), 9.
   ethical and political stakes” (14).           73 See the blog post by Ramesh Srinivasan:
65 This is the challenge at the conclusion of       “Starting with Culture Before Technolo-
   Fredric Jameson’s Postmodernism, or the          gy—My Work From Egypt” (August 30,
   Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, 54.           2011): http://rameshsrinivasan.
66 Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern            org/2011/08/30/starting-with-culture-be-
   Condition: A Report on Knowledge, trans.         fore-technology-my-work-from-egypt/.
   Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi            74 Ramesh Srinivasan, “Digital Dissent and
   (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota            People’s Power: Ramesh Srinivasan at
   Press), 60ff.                                    TEDxSanJoaquin,” TEDxSanJoaquin, Oc-
67 For an overview of modalities of “collabo-       tober 10, 2012, San Joaquin, CA.
   ration” and “participation” in the digital    75 Gilles Deleuze, The Logic of Sense, trans.
   humanities, see Lisa Spiro’s essay, “Com-        Mark Lester (New York: Columbia Univer-
   puting and Communicating Knowledge:              sity Press), 64.
   Collaborative Approaches to Digital Hu-       76 Lev Manovich on “cultural analytics”:
   manities Projects”: http://ccdigitalpress.       http://www.manovich.net/cultural_
   org/cad/Ch2_Spiro.pdf.                           analytics.pdf.
68 Michel Foucault, “The Discourse on Lan-       77 Franco Moretti, “Conjectures on World
   guage,” in: The Archaeology of Knowledge,        Literature,” in: New Left Review (Jan.-Feb.
   trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York:           2000): 54-68.
   Pantheon, 1970).                              78 Johanna Drucker, “Humanities Ap-
69 Jacques Derrida, “The University without         proaches to Graphical Display,” Digital
   Condition,” in: Without Alibi, trans. Peggy      Humanities Quarterly 5.1 (2011), 2.
   Kamuf (Stanford: Stanford University             http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/
   Press, 2000), 202-37.                            vol/5/1/000091/000091.html.




           208
79 Since the Revolution, social media access           ing and Difference, trans. Alan Bass (Lon-
   and use has grown throughout Egypt, not             don: Routledge, 2001), 351-70.
   only giving rise to new ways to influence        84 Roughly speaking, the Louvain method
   and undermine traditional media, but also           operates by placing every node into a
   enfranchising a significantly broader spec-         community, and checking that communi-
   trum of activists and politicians—ranging           ty’s connection to other communities. If a
   from the Muslim Brotherhood to the                  community has a strong connection to
   Egyptian military. Ramesh Srinivasan,               another community, the method places
   “Taking Power Through Technology in the             the node in that community. Then, it ap-
   Arab Spring,” in Aljazeera (October 25,             plies the same process to the communities
   2012): http://www.aljazeera.com/                    it has created, and continues creating com-
   indepth/opinion/2012/09/                            munities of communities of communities
   2012919115344299848.html.                           until it reaches a certain limit. For a com-
80 All network graphs were generated using             plete description of the method, see Vin-
   the Gephi network visualization software.           cent D. Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume,
81 To extract the hashtags for the graph, we           Renaud Lambiotte, and Etienne Lefeb-
   used the following algorithm to include             vre, “Fast Unfolding of Communities in
   non-English characters: split the tweet by          Large Networks,” Journal of Statistical
   whitespace into tokens, find any that begin         Mechanics: Theory and Experiment (Octo-
   with a hash sign (#), and keep all charac-          ber 2008): 2008.10, n.p. (web).
   ters in them before the first punctuation        85 Yoh Kawano, Hiroyuki Iseki, “GIS Volun-
   mark (as defined in Python’s string.punc-           teering: Tohoku Kanto Earthquake in
   tuation) or ANSI control characters                 Japan.” http://www.giscorps.org/index.
   (non-printing text-display commands)                php?option=com_content&task=view&id
   before Unicode character code 32 (0x1F).            =102&Itemid=63.
   Gephi seems able to display the Arabic           86 Olivia Katrandjian, Joohee Cho, Juju
   characters, but the monolingualism of               Chang, “Japan’s Fukushima 50: Heroes
   some text analysis algorithms is a signifi-         Who Volunteered to Stay Behind at Japan’s
   cant problem that must be addressed by              Crippled Nuclear Plants,” ABC World
   global digital humanities. After all, to truly      News (March 16, 2011): http://abcnews.
   enable “participation without condition,”           go.com/International/fukushi-
   the technologies must support linguistic            ma-50-line-defense-japanese-nucle-
   diversity and not simply extend the cultur-         ar-complex/story?id=13147746#.
   al hegemony of English, despite the tech-           UKyLlKX3BL8.
   nical challenges in adapting text-searching      87 “Nuclear Workers in Japan: Heroism and
   algorithms to non-English characters.               Humility,” The Economist (October 27,
82 Louvain was run in Gephi randomized,                2012): http://www.economist.com/news/
   using edge weights, with a resolution of 1.0.       asia/21565269-meet-%E2%80%9C-
   The same settings were used for all subse-          fukushima-50%E2%80%9D-men-
   quent community detection operations.               front-line-nuclear-disaster-
83 Derrida, “Structure, Sign, and Play in the          heroism-and-humility.
   Discourse of the Human Sciences,” Writ-          88 A cron job is a Unix program run at a




209
   scheduled time by the operating system,
   instead of in response to user input.
89 Nakamura Akira, Emotion Expression
   Dictionary (Tokyo-do Shuppan, 1993)
   [in Japanese].
90 The original methodology to detect emo-
   tions through text matching was suggested
   by Eiji Aramaki PhD. Eiji is a natural
   language expert working for the
   Center for Knowledge Structuring,
   and is currently an assistant professor
   at Tokyo University.
91 The 35 day “text” files were exported as
   separate CSV files from a MySQL data-
   base. These files were first tokenized using
   MeCab (an open source Japanese language
   morphological analyzer created by Kyoto
   University), then imported into Word-
   Smith where multiple concordance rou-
   tines were run against each group of emo-
   tion keywords. The resulting output was
   transformed into “nodes” and “edges” and
   subsequently imported into Gephi in or-
   der to generate the network diagrams.
92 William Pesek, “A Disaster Made in Ja-
   pan,” Bloomberg (July 9, 2012): http://
   www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-07-09/
   search-for-truth-finds-a-disaster-made-
   in-japan.html.




           210
Acknowledgments                                  Patterson), the UCLA Library (Gary Strong,
                                                 Todd Grappone, Zoe Borovsky, Jonnie Hargis,
                                                 and Stephen Davidson), and the UCLA Cen-
     The HyperCities project—a decade-long       ter for Digital Humanities (Shawn Higgins,
effort to explore thick mapping in the dig-      Yusuf Bhabhrawala, Annelie Rugg, and Akash
ital humanities—was made possible by the         Haswani). Over the years, countless many
support of many people, organizations, and       students, faculty, and members of the general
foundations. First, we want to acknowledge       public have provided valuable feedback and
the extraordinary creativity and acuity of       opportunities for collaboration, and we would
our technical development team, particularly     particularly like to single out: Cathy David-
Chen-Kuei “James” Lee and Lung-Chih “Jay”        son, Craig Dietrich, Amir Eshel, David Theo
Tung, both (at the time) graduate students       Goldberg, Laura Mandell, Lev Manovich, Tara
in UCLA’s Computer Science department.           McPherson, and, most recently, the cohort of
They worked closely with Presner, Shepard,       the 2012 NEH Summer Institute at UCLA on
and Kawano over the last five years to design    Advanced Topics in the Digital Humanities.
HyperCities and support projects developed       Finally, we want to acknowledge the vision
using a wide variety of mapping technologies.    and support of Jeffrey Schnapp, who provided
Collectively, the dedication and insights of     the very first round of seed-funding in 1999
the “technical team” were indispensable for      for what would become HyperCities and
the successes of the project. We also thank      has been a stalwart supporter of the project
the “HyperCities Collaborative,” a team of       ever since. Together with our editor, Michael
faculty and community partners, convened by      Fischer, his guidance has been instrumental
Presner, project founder and director: Dean      in producing this book.
Abernathy, Mike Blockstein, Reanne Estrada,           Regarding the Japan story, we would like
Philip Ethington, Diane Favro, Chris Johan-      to thank our partners at Niigata University,
son, John Maciuika, Jan Reiff, and Aquilina      particularly Makoto Naito, Jun Goto, and
Soriano-Versoza. Thanks also go out to the       Yugo Shobugawa, who continue to work
many students who contributed to the project     tirelessly toward improving the lives of those
over the years, especially Ryan Chen, Barbara    affected by the disaster. We would also like
Hui, Albert Kochaphum, Patrick Tran, Andy        to thank Satoshi Mimura who kindly volun-
Trang, Shawn Westbrook, and Elliot Yama-         teered an entire day to drive Kawano
moto. Andy and Patrick created much of the       and the team from Niigata University around
project documentation and, over the years,       the disaster areas, and to the government
supported many students in using Hyper-          workers from the City of Namie for accom-
Cities as well as produced several exemplary     panying us into the nuclear evacuation zone.
projects themselves, including a series of       Finally, the HyperCities project graciously
mappings of the life stories of local Holo-      acknowledges the visionary and critical
caust survivors. Ryan, Albert, and Elliot were   support of the MacArthur Foundation and
instrumental as GIS assistants and played a      HASTAC for the 2008 “digital media and
central role in creating the maps in the book    learning prize,” the Haynes Foundation, the
as well as helping with the book’s overall       Keck Foundation, the National Endowment
design. We also thank UCLA’s Institute for       for the Humanities, the American Council of
Digital Research and Education (and espe-        Learned Societies, and a Google “Digital Hu-
cially Lisa Snyder, Grant Young, and Christina   manities” award.


211
Credits
Figure 1, page 25: Google Earth
Figure 2, page 27: The Granger Collection,
New York
Figure, 8, page 84: NASA
Figure 9, page 87: NASA
Figure 10, page 89: Google Earth
Figure 13, page 101: Google Earth

Figure 16, page 115: Used by permission.
Copyright ©2013 Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye,
i-cubed, USDA, USGS, AEX, Getmapping,
Aerogrid, IGN, IGP, swisstopo, and the GIS
User Community. All rights reserved.

Figure 19, page 117: Used by permission.
Copyright ©2013 Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye,
i-cubed, USDA, USGS, AEX, Getmapping,
Aerogrid, IGN, IGP, swisstopo, and the GIS
User community. All rights reserved




Author Key
TP - Todd Presner
DS - David Shepard
YK - Yoh Kawano
